 So, large language models, I guess you always,
 probably all of you have heard of this word,
 large language models.
 This is precisely, I think in some sense,
 this is all starting from GPT-3,
 when Open-I released GPT-3.
 It has a, it uses new paradigm,
 which uses autoregressive large language models.
 So, basically we're gonna focus on that.
 You know, autoregressive large language models,
 we're gonna skip some of the earlier versions
 of transformer which are not autoregressive.
 So, and another regressive basically means
 that you generate tokens one by one,
 and each of the new tokens depends on the previous tokens,
 and you do this, and you model probability
 in this kind of like autoregressive way.
 I'm gonna talk more about details.
 In some sense, you model your language distribution
 by using a sequential model one by one in some sense.
 Anyway, so let's, I think the point,
 our goal is to talk about some details.
 So, I'll fill in more high-level stuff
 as we talk about the details.
 So, the first thing we're gonna talk about is tokenization.
 This is just to prepare us to talk about the real meat
 in some sense.
 So, what does tokenization mean?
 It means that you need to, you know,
 these transformers, they are numerical architecture models,
 right, so they take in, in some sense, numerical numbers.
 So, but you have tags, and how do you turn tags
 into some kind of things that the models can understand?
 So, the first step is to tokenize.
 Tokenize means that you need to decide, you know,
 what is the smallest unit of the input
 you give to the large language model.
 And often it's not a word, right?
 The most natural thing you can think of is,
 maybe a small thing is it's a character or a word.
 If you use character-level tokenization,
 then the issue is that often you have so many characters,
 right, you need so many tokens, so many steps.
 And if you use word-level tokenization,
 then often the issue is that you don't,
 how do you deal with this long word, which are very rare?
 For example, you have a word called, say,
 internal naturalization, right?
 So, if you treat this word as a single word,
 then maybe it's too rare, and you don't leverage
 your understanding about other words, right?
 So, if you treat internationalization as one word,
 then it is different from internationalized.
 It is different from, like, a nation, right?
 And they are all completely different kind of things,
 and you cannot leverage that, you know,
 for example, if you understand internationalized,
 then you should probably understand internationalization
 to some degree without even seeing more data.
 And so, that's why people don't always use
 subword tokenization, don't use word tokenization.
 Maybe another, okay, maybe let me give you another example,
 for example, if you have used this, I guess in my notes,
 there is this word, L-I-M, modification.
 Actually, I don't know whether this is a real word,
 like, I think it's a new word that is completely new word,
 nobody have used it before 2020, I guess, right?
 So, even right now, it's not that kind of, like, common.
 And if you have to treat this word as a unit,
 then you have to see this word enough times
 to understand what it means, right?
 However, if you treat it as subwords,
 then maybe you have a token called L-M,
 you have a token which is, you have two units,
 this is a token, this is a token.
 So, L-M is a token, implication is a token.
 Then, in some sense, you have seen L-M many, many times,
 you already understand it.
 And then, if vacation has a special meaning in English,
 and then you combine these two,
 understanding you understand the word.
 So, that's much more efficient understanding of the word
 than just treating this whole thing as a single unit.
 So, and this happens more often in, for example, biology,
 when you have this very long word,
 or maybe in German you have very long word,
 but actually there are fundamentally many combinations
 of many subwords.
 And using subword tokenization allows you
 to understand each of the subwords,
 and then you can understand the combination
 of those subwords as a whole, very efficiently.
 So, yeah, so basically tokenization just means
 that you have a predefined vocabulary.
 Vocabulary.
 And this vocabulary is a list of subwords, right?
 So, for example, you can have many, many of this,
 like maybe A is a subword, is the one of the token,
 I think maybe like a dog is a token.
 Pretty much all common words these states is a token.
 And actually, if you look at the,
 actually you can play with the tokenization online,
 if you search Open I tokenizer, Open I give you a playground
 where you can see how the tags are tokenized.
 And you'll find that actually blank dog is also a token.
 So, the blank is actually merged with dog as a token.
 And you have so many of this.
 Typically this kind of tokenization right now,
 I think for the open source models,
 we know the number of tokens they have.
 I think it's often on the order of like 10 to the five,
 like a 100k at least.
 I think QN 3.5, this is the newest version
 of open source models, which are pretty good.
 I think they have like 250 tokens.
 I think 250 probably is mostly because,
 I think 250 is somehow you can represent this token
 with like a, maybe eight bytes in some sense,
 like it also depends on how many bytes
 you can present the tokens.
 So, anyway, so you have this vocabulary,
 and then you just, given a long string of tags,
 you just take all the sub words that are tokens
 and you turn it into a sequence of like segments, right?
 For example, if you say, if I have a dog runs,
 suppose this is the tags you see,
 and then you'll say this is a token,
 so this is one part.
 And then I think blank dog is a token.
 And blank runs is also a token.
 And comma, I think is a token by itself.
 So, and every token has an ID, right?
 So, let's say A is probably the ID number one,
 dog is maybe the ID number like 356, whatever.
 And run is some ID, I don't know, like maybe 250.
 I'm just writing some random numbers.
 Everything has an ID, so basically you turn every tags
 into a sequence of IDs, each ID corresponds to one token.
 And I think, so in this case,
 most of these words are actually one token.
 I think I just checked it recently.
 If you have the word happiness,
 I think the tokenization will be unhappiness, let's say.
 I think this part is a token.
 H is a token, and APNESS is a token for some reason.
 And maybe another example is this,
 oh, I already raised it, the ILM investigation.
 And this is another example that I come,
 we come up with, you know, just a,
 I don't know actually what this words means.
 If you have a BLASTOMA, I think this part is a token,
 this part is a token, and this part is token.
 I think this is just because for this biological words,
 you know, biomedical words, you know,
 actually every part of the word has some special meaning,
 and so you tokenize them into tokens.
 And what is the exact vocabulary?
 It depends on the model.
 So basically the algorithm that turns the tax
 into this token is called a tokenizer.
 And every model has a different tokenizer.
 Not everyone has a different one.
 Some of them shared the same tokenizers,
 but generally it's specific to the tokenizer,
 to the model, and different companies
 have different proprietary tokenization approach.
 You've probably heard of that recently,
 I think cloud code, cloud, they update their tokenizer
 so that I think they make the tokenizers more granular.
 To some degree, so that the same amount of tax
 will be tokenized into more tokens.
 So before, it's just like 1,000 tokens,
 and now it's 1.5,000 tokens.
 You know, I didn't verify it myself,
 but I read some news about this.
 Assuming they are true, that means that you spend
 more tokens, you know, you pay more to cloud code,
 with the same amount of tax.
 Anyway, so cool.
 And there are some details about how to come up
 with the vocabulary and how to kind of like,
 run this algorithm to tokenize.
 The key word is called BPE tokenizer,
 byte paired encoding.
 So I'm not going through the details
 because this is just a very small, quick setup.
 It's not that important, but roughly speaking,
 the BPE tokenization idea is that you try to,
 in some sense, you just try to find frequent subwords
 that are most frequent, right,
 and use them in the vocabulary.
 But how do you decide which one is more frequent and not?
 I think there's a sequential algorithm.
 You first go through maybe like the smallest
 kind of like combinations of like,
 you go through all the characters,
 and you try to find, you know,
 I think it's a greedy algorithm.
 First, you try to find the most frequent one character thing,
 and you find the most frequent combination
 of two characters, and you remove, you know,
 it's sort of complicated, which I,
 I mean, I'll try to give you a precise version,
 but it's kind of like a greedy algorithm
 that decides which one is more frequent, so and so forth.
 And if you are interested,
 you can look up the exact algorithm.
 Okay, so that's the tokenization.
 So that means that from now on, you know,
 we just assume we have a tokenizer.
 So every tax, every piece of tax
 will be turned into a sequence of tokens.
 So from now on, like a tax,
 it just means a sequence of tokens,
 and each of this xi is in a vocabulary.
 Let's call it a vocabulary v.
 And the size of the vocabulary could be like 250,000s.
 And, you know, each of this is kind of like an index
 in the vocabulary, like, you know,
 this is the fifth token,
 this is the 105th token, so and so forth.
 Okay, so now the question is, you know,
 now we go into the next question,
 which is how do we model this distribution
 of sequence of tokens?
 How do we create a probabilistic model to model it?
 If you think about the support of this distribution,
 like how many possible combinations
 that are possible here,
 so the number of possible combinations is,
 you have v choice, this is the cardinality of v.
 You have v choice, cardinality of v choice
 for each of the tokens,
 and you have a sequence of less t,
 so you take the power to the t, right?
 So everyone has v choice, and v to the power t
 is the total number of choices.
 So you cannot assign one probability
 for each of this sequence,
 like a discrete categorical tokens, right?
 Categorical distributions, right?
 If you treat this as a categorical distributions,
 then every choice here will have one probability,
 and that's just way too many parameters to describe it.
 So that's why what people do is that people decompose
 this distribution using the chain rule to write it this way.
 So you say, suppose I have a probability distribution
 over the joint of the sequence,
 then I can write it as the following,
 so I can say it's equals to p of x1
 times p of x2 given x1,
 p of x3 given x2 and x1,
 so on and so forth,
 and p of xt given x1 up to xt minus one.
 And this is the so-called conditional probability
 decomposition.
 You decompose the joint distribution
 into a product of conditional probabilities.
 And you model each of these conditional probabilities.
 The benefit here is that each of these conditional probabilities
 is a conditional distribution,
 but the choice of x2, for example, here is only v.
 You don't have v choices here.
 You only have to have kind of like a softmax or logits
 over v choices for each of this.
 So each of this will be, eventually you'll see,
 is some kind of like a,
 you have some logits and you apply some softmax,
 you get a probability distribution over v choice.
 So that's what we're gonna do.
 So basically each of this will be parametrized
 by a new artwork.
 The input will be what's after the conditioning,
 the input here is the x1 and x2,
 and output is the distribution of x3.
 And this input-output relationship is modeled
 by a new artwork, which is a transformer.
 Okay, so that's what we are going towards.
 How do we model each of this conditional distribution?
 So basically we're gonna describe a conditional distribution
 p of p sub theta xt given x1 up to xt minus one.
 So before going to details,
 let's treat this as a kind of like a black box first.
 And let's first kind of like discuss a little bit
 about the boundary in some sense.
 It's kind of like multiple layers here.
 So the typical way to parametrize this is the following.
 So you use a transformer.
 So basically what happens is that you have
 a sequence x1 up to xt.
 And so first of all, these are discrete IDs, right?
 So each of these means ID for the token.
 You first have to turn them into some numerical numbers.
 So the first step is that you say,
 I'm gonna turn this into an embedding e of x1.
 And so basically I turn each of the token x into xt,
 into an embedding of xt.
 And what is the embedding?
 Embedding is as a d-dimensional vector in the Euclidean space.
 And this embedding is trained.
 So basically you don't know what the parameters are.
 You will just parametrize it as unknown numbers
 and you train the model to find the right numbers
 for these embeddings.
 So every token of vocabulary will have
 a corresponding embeddings.
 So basically you're gonna have a sequence
 of embeddings e1, e2.
 This is the embedding for the first token,
 embedding for the second token,
 up to the embedding for the last token.
 And in this lecture, I think we're gonna use row vectors
 because I think when you get into the implementations,
 every vector is actually row vectors in the Python code,
 even though in mathematics,
 people often use column vectors.
 So I thought about this and I thought just for this,
 for large English model sections,
 we'll just always use row vectors,
 which is more consistent with the practice.
 It looks a bit weird to me actually
 from a mathematical perspective.
 I mean, if you read the papers,
 many of the papers do use column vectors,
 but I think we'll just use row vectors
 to be consistent with the code.
 So basically every embedding is a row vector.
 And then you have this embedding matrix.
 So this is, you have V of them
 and each of them is of dimension D.
 So you have this matrix.
 And to read off which row you are,
 you just have to multiply, either you just read off the ID,
 so if you have the fifth token,
 you just read the fifth row,
 or you can multiply this matrix
 with an indicator vector together that row,
 which is the same thing.
 Anyway, so we'll just read off from this embedding matrix,
 the corresponding embeddings for each of the token.
 So you get E of X2 up to E of XT.
 And I think in many cases, often people append,
 prepend a begin of sentence token,
 which is just a fixed token in the very beginning.
 This is kind of like not always necessary.
 In some cases, you just don't do it.
 In some cases, you do it.
 But let's probably just introduce that.
 You have a begin of sentence token,
 which is one of the special token in this vocabulary.
 You probably, often actually what happens
 is that your vocabulary is bigger than what is needed.
 You always reserve a few tokens,
 or actually maybe a few thousand tokens
 for special tokens that you can introduce
 for special purposes.
 And you can introduce this begin of sentence token
 as X0, which is always the same.
 And then you turn them into embeddings.
 And then what you do is that you go through this transformer,
 which I will discuss in the later half of the lecture.
 So this is a transformer.
 For now, you just think of this as a new artwork,
 which does a lot of computation, machine application,
 you know, attentions, which I'm going to discuss.
 A lot of operations, and then you output some logits of,
 like you output some kind of logits
 at each of the locations.
 So each of these logits is supposed to describe
 the conditional distribution before the softmax.
 So basically,
 what you do is you say the probability of,
 so let's just, you say each of these Eu1 is,
 let's call this Eu1, Eu theta X0,
 and then P of X1 is modeled as, you know,
 just the softmax.
 This distribution P of Xi is the,
 X1 is modeled as the softmax of F theta X0.
 So the first distribution, which is not conditional,
 you just get the output from the X0,
 you get some logits.
 So this Ui is in dimension V,
 and you take a softmax, you get a probability vector.
 So this is a probability vector,
 right, in this simplex of dimension V, right?
 So the sum, after taking a softmax,
 the sum of the entries is one,
 and all of the entries are non-active.
 So then this is your probability for X1.
 This is the distribution.
 Technically, I think the distribution of this
 is equal to softmax, okay?
 And then the same thing, you know,
 when you have X2 given X1,
 you say this is equal to softmax of U2,
 where U2 is the output at the second position,
 and U2, you know, we'll just call U2 the same as, you know,
 so you call U2 the output, you know,
 of this model given X0 and X1.
 So each of these Ui's is basically the output.
 For the sequence before it, right?
 So UT plus one is F theta X0 up to XT.
 So basically, generically, you know, P of XT
 given X1 of XT minus one is the softmax of UT.
 Is it UT or UT plus one?
 UT plus UT, yes, UT,
 which is the softmax of F theta X0 up to XT.
 T minus one.
 Okay, any questions so far?
 - You index them through UT sort of zero or?
 - So I particularly chose it to index at one, yes.
 - Okay, and so that's on the right.
 - Yes.
 U is just a vector, you know, I think that, you know,
 I can just call U, I think it's kind of like a,
 I can just call U F theta X0 is the same thing.
 I'm not, did I answer the question?
 - Yeah, we're like, should I explain?
 (indistinct)
 Okay, so I think maybe that's the,
 so I'm just using outside X0, X1 as a more explicit way
 to represent UI because I'm trying to express the dependency.
 So basically, I'm saying like a,
 basically, I think they are the same thing.
 Like it's just, there are no difference at all in some sense,
 just how you view it, right?
 Like in one way, you just say, oh, I have, I need a,
 a notation for the vector, and the other way is I have,
 I need to interpret this vector as a function of the inputs.
 - Right, right, yeah, I mean that part is here.
 - Oh, okay, okay, okay, so maybe I didn't have a question.
 (indistinct)
 - There's a probability of like seeing that (indistinct)
 (indistinct)
 - Yes, yes, yes, so I think maybe,
 I'm trying to figure out what's the question here.
 So I think maybe what you're asking is the following.
 So maybe let's take this one, right?
 So this is a vector, this is a vector in dimension V.
 So in a vocabulary size.
 And you have to take a softmax, it's a sequence of numbers
 which are all non-negative and they sum to one.
 So, and what this really means is that p theta of Xt
 is equals to one given X1 up to Xt minus one.
 The chance to see the first token
 under this probabilistic model, parametric by theta
 is equals to, this is a vector,
 the first entry of this vector, right?
 It's equals to softmax f theta X0 up to Xt minus one,
 index by one, this is the first entry of this vector.
 And you have many, many other entries, right?
 Each entry, you have another entry, softmax f theta, sorry.
 Two, and that is equals to p theta of Xt is equal to two,
 the chance of seeing the second token
 given X1 up to Xt minus one.
 And you have so and so forth.
 Does that answer the question?
 (audience member speaks off mic)
 Yeah, this V absolute value is the size of the vocabulary.
 - So it's like a mass of entry
 because the models are conditional on like
 (audience member speaks off mic)
 one's accurate, right?
 - Yep, yep.
 So this is a causal model so far,
 but I haven't defined the transformer yet.
 So, but I'm insisting that this is only,
 so guys, this is one of the reasons
 I'm using this notation.
 So I'm insisting that ut is only a function
 of X0 and Xt minus one,
 but not a function of the later inputs.
 So, but that will be guaranteed
 when we introduce the exact inner working of this transformer.
 (audience member speaks off mic)
 Okay, good question.
 So the first, the second question is easier to answer.
 So the embeddings is only a property of the,
 this X, right?
 You don't have to see any other things, right?
 It's just actually, it's literally,
 if this is the first token,
 then you just read the first row of this matrix.
 If this is the 10th token,
 you read the 10th row and that's your embedding.
 No any other dependencies.
 And while we are writing this as functions of the X,
 but not the embeddings, that's just a,
 it's just a, it's sometimes the embeddings
 is the inner working to some degree.
 I'm just trying to give you more,
 I'm trying to unpack it a bit, right?
 So if you don't have to unpack it,
 you just work, you can work with the text.
 Yeah, that's just a representation.
 Yeah, and it's one to one.
 So in some sense, there's no difference.
 Okay, so this is a full description of the probabilistic model.
 Once you have this probabilistic model,
 you can compute the maximum likelihood.
 Given any data, we can say, I have a data distribution,
 I have a data point, a sequence of data I can see
 and this probabilistic model p theta,
 what is the chance of seeing this data?
 So that's what you need for computing the,
 do the training, right?
 You need to compute the likelihood
 and then you maximize the likelihood
 as a function of theta, right?
 So, and let's briefly discuss for generation, right?
 So suppose you already have the generation of decoding.
 Suppose you already have the model,
 then a model theta, then what do you do?
 So as you can see, the most natural thing
 is you just keep generating X1, X2, X3, so on and so forth.
 You just say, I'm gonna generate X1 first
 from this, you know, p, say softmax,
 softmax, you know, F theta, X1 up to,
 X0 up to Xt, X, I guess I just did right generically.
 So you generate Xt minus one from F theta X0
 up to Xt minus one, right?
 You can do this sequentially.
 Sometimes you would draw this in this way.
 So you would say, oh, you have X0,
 you first go through the transformer
 and you get X1 and you feed X1 back to this transformer.
 Right, so, and then you generate X2
 by sampling from the softmax and then you feed back.
 So that's kind of why it's called autoregressive
 because you have to, like when you are generating,
 you don't have the sequence, right?
 When you are computing a log likelihood,
 you see the whole, you already see the whole sequence.
 You are just trying to figure out
 what's the chance of seeing this sequence.
 But when you are generating, you start with nothing
 and then you have to generate your sequence yourself
 and that's why you start with the beginning
 of sentence sequence token and then you generate first token
 and then you give the first token back to the transformer
 and compute this softmax and then you generate second token,
 you do a sampling to generate second token
 and you give it back and you keep doing this.
 So that's the autoregressive generation.
 And sometimes this generation only start from certain parts
 because in many cases you are not generating from nothing.
 So you are given maybe a few tokens,
 maybe you are given, so sometimes it's called prompt.
 So prompt is like something the models are given.
 It's maybe like a question, instructions, so on and so forth.
 You say you are given x1 up to xk
 and then the model is supposed to complete the generation.
 So it start with xt plus one, so xt plus one,
 so this is given and then you start with xt plus one,
 you first generate xt plus one from this softmax
 of the f theta x1 up to xk
 and then you generate xt k plus two
 and then you do the same thing.
 So it doesn't have to be always from the beginning
 and then there's another small thing
 which is that when you generate,
 you don't necessarily have to always follow the same model
 and there's one thing that you can deviate from it
 which is that you can add additional temperature
 where you say as opposed to generating
 from the original probabilistic model,
 I'm gonna divide this by a temperature T tall or T sometimes.
 So and what does this mean is that you change the,
 you don't change the orders between these choices, right?
 So this f theta is a vector, right?
 It's a v-dimensional vector that describes the largest
 for each of the tokens in the vocabulary
 and when you divide by tall,
 you don't change their relative orders.
 The bigger ones are still bigger,
 the smaller ones are still smaller,
 but you change the scale.
 So for example, before you could have like a,
 so suppose I have theta x0 up to xk is equals to let's say,
 maybe like a two, one, minus ones, something like this
 and if you divide by tall,
 let's say suppose you divide by tall,
 which is very, very small.
 Suppose tall is almost zero.
 Then after dividing by tall,
 like if you divide by tall,
 then what happens is that maybe this becomes 200,
 this becomes 100.
 I'm giving you a concrete example,
 which is a little bit unrealistic,
 but to demonstrate a point.
 And what's the difference between the softmax of this vector
 versus the softmax of the readjusted vector?
 The difference is that the softmax of this is much sharper.
 So maybe let me just give you an example here.
 So if you just have, let's say,
 maybe I just have three dimension
 so that it's easier to demonstrate a point.
 So if you do softmax of this vector of two, one, minus one,
 what happens is that you get,
 in some sense you get exponential two
 over exponential two plus exponential one
 plus exponential minus one.
 That's the, after softmax was the probability
 of the first token, right?
 And the second token will be exponential one,
 exponential two plus exponential one
 plus exponential minus one.
 Right, and the third one will be the same denominator,
 the different numerator, right?
 So that's the softmax of this.
 But if you take the softmax of the 200, 100, minus 100,
 suppose you do that.
 Then this will give you exponential 200
 versus exponential 200 plus exponential 100
 plus exponential minus 100, blah, blah, blah.
 So what's the difference here?
 The difference is that in terms of the three numbers,
 in terms of the order, it's always like this is bigger
 and this, this is bigger and this, right?
 Because 200 is bigger, two is bigger than one,
 one is bigger than minus one, the order is always maintained.
 But the relative scale is different
 because here you can see exponential 200
 is way, way bigger than exponential 100.
 The difference is like so astronomical,
 like it's too, the difference is too big
 so that these two numbers are just so small
 compared to exponential 200.
 So they are even negligible.
 So basically in this calculation,
 these two numbers don't even have to show up here,
 like it don't even matter.
 So you just get what?
 So basically the first token will just have probably
 exactly, almost exactly what, maybe .9999 or something.
 And then if you look at the second entry,
 which is exponential 100 divided by exponential 200
 plus exponential 100 plus exponential minus 100.
 Again, everything is negligible compared to exponential 200.
 So this is not very useful, this is not very useful,
 this is kind of like close to zero.
 So basically this answer will be zero.
 So that's why after you divide by tall to make this bigger,
 then this is just approximately one, zero, and zero.
 So that's what I mean by it's much sharper.
 So you sharpen the distribution to make it,
 most of the distribution to be,
 the problem has to be on the most likely token.
 And however here,
 exponential two and exponential one are not that different.
 If you compute this, you'll get something like maybe,
 the first one will be like maybe .7,
 the second one will be .3,
 I don't know, like we can use a calculator to see.
 But it will still be like this one is bigger than this,
 and the second one is bigger than the third one,
 but it won't be like all the math is on the first token.
 So basically what I'm trying to say is
 that if tall is a small number,
 so that you amplify the largest,
 then you are sharpening the resulting distribution
 to make it more like a consumer-state distribution.
 And then as a result, you are just generating,
 you are just a sampling from the most likely token.
 You are taking a max as opposed to sampling from it.
 And that's actually what people actually do,
 like they say, basically like I think actually,
 in API call, you have to try to choose the temperature.
 And if you choose a small temperature,
 it means that you want more deterministic generation.
 If you choose a temperature to be zero,
 it means that your generation will just be always deterministic
 every time you take the largest most likely token,
 and then keep going on, right?
 And of course, you can also change the temperature
 to be smaller than, bigger than one,
 which makes the distribution more softer,
 so that you focus more on the long tail,
 like you can generate more tokens from the tail,
 so you have more stochasticity
 and uncertainty in your generation.
 Sometimes that's useful because you want to encourage
 some diversity in your generation, and you do that.
 Especially in RL, sometimes you have to do that.
 Cool, okay, sounds good.
 And sometimes there are also other ways of sampling,
 which is, probably I shouldn't go into details,
 there are some notes in the lecture notes.
 So another way to do it is that you,
 this factor right now, I have three dimensions,
 but actually it's like the dimensionality is V, right?
 Like which is like 250 or something.
 You can take top K and then drop off the other dimensions.
 So you may sample from the most likely K tokens,
 and you renormalize the distribution.
 So basically, the first K tokens may not cover
 all the probabilistic, probabilistic nice.
 So, but still, that's probably easier to generate
 because you don't want to generate two rare tokens,
 so you just drop everything below top K and then generate.
 Okay, sounds good.
 So I think I'm probably,
 and then, okay, so once you have,
 so this is the generation,
 and then for the training,
 I think I already kind of like describe it a little bit.
 So when you do the training,
 you just compute the log likelihood,
 the negative log likelihood,
 the negative log likelihood,
 and you say this is a log,
 so if you have example X1 up to Xt,
 so the minus log P theta X1 up to Xt,
 capital G is just minus log,
 the product of all of this, right?
 P theta X1, P theta X2 given X1, so on and so forth.
 And this is the minus the sum of the log
 of the P of Xt given X1 up to Xt minus one.
 And then you change this to log of the softmax
 of P1 of this F theta.
 And here, this Xt is a particular choice of Xt, right?
 Which is seen in the data,
 so that means you are looking at the Xt entry
 of the softmax.
 This softmax will give you the probability
 for every possible tokens,
 and then you are only interested in the probability
 to see that particular token Xt,
 so that's why you're looking at Xt index of that vector,
 and that's a single scalar, you take the log,
 and you take the sum over t,
 and that's your loss function.
 And then you can optimize this loss function by,
 for example, some optimizers, like SGD or IDON.
 We didn't discuss IDON in this lecture,
 which is the extension of the SGD optimizer,
 but mostly you can just call the optimizer as a black box
 to optimize the loss function.
 - In this field, we are really just optimizing
 for the property of the loss vector,
 loss ID, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
 I mean, we actually added the, uh.
 - It's actually not the last one, right,
 because this is the sum from t to one to type two t.
 The little t and the larger t.
 Okay, sounds good.
 Okay, so then in the next 30 minutes,
 I'm going to tell you what this function f is, right?
 Or maybe it was hidden in this transformer.
 What's the operation we have to do
 to compute the lodges here?
 And it's pretty complicated,
 so it probably takes more than 30 minutes,
 but I will see how much I can do.
 So, any questions before that?
 Okay, so at a high level, this transformer has multiple layers.
 And so you start with, like, ex one up to ex t,
 and you first apply a so-called attention layer,
 which I will define,
 and then you apply the so-called MLP.
 So, first of all, the attention layer,
 the attention always takes in a sequence of vectors
 and output a sequence of vectors.
 So you output a bunch of vectors
 at each position, you output one vector,
 and then each of these vector will go through a MLP.
 MLP means like a multi-layer perception,
 which is just a two or three-layer network.
 And each of these vector will go through this MLP.
 And then you apply another attention.
 This attention will take in many, many vectors,
 and then output a sequence of vectors.
 And then you do the MLP.
 So that's the high level structure of this attention.
 And eventually you have to output,
 remember, eventually you have to output a sequence of vectors.
 So basically, you do enough of these alternations
 between these two, and eventually you have this MLP,
 and you output some vectors u1 up to ut.
 And you alternate between attention and MLP.
 That's the high level idea.
 And I think we'll focus most of our energy
 on defining our attention,
 which is kind of like the most new thing, right?
 Because MLP is just a two-layer network
 with some special kind of gating,
 or some kind of like a special activation function.
 And another small thing is that the MLP
 are sharing the parameters
 and they are applying independently.
 So each of these vectors is processed by the MLP
 in an independent fashion.
 There's no kind of dependencies between positions
 when you apply the MLP.
 They are just very separate operations.
 So the only way that you are using,
 you are kind of like few,
 you fuse the input from different positions
 or different time steps is the attention.
 So the attention will look at all those vectors
 and process a little bit,
 and then output a sequence of vectors.
 And MLP is very parallelized
 and the parallelizable and independent.
 Okay, so now let's define attention.
 (audience member speaks off microphone)
 This entire thing will be shown as a single system.
 So basically, once you define the architecture,
 you apply the auto-differentiation.
 You treat this whole thing as a gigantic network.
 Yeah, Antoine.
 (audience member speaks off microphone)
 Yeah, but auto-differentiation still works.
 So the auto-differentiation,
 I think as we discussed, if you remember,
 it's kind of like fundamental is claiming
 that if you have a way to compute your forward pass,
 as long as there are compositions
 of many, many different components,
 like a basic components,
 you can compute a backward pass the same way.
 So here is indeed a composition
 of many, many small arithmetic operations
 because as you see,
 the attention layer has many small matrix applications
 and the MLP has many matrix applications
 and you can automatically differentiate.
 Okay, so now let's talk about attention.
 So for attention, one thing to remember first
 is that the type signature
 is that you input a sequence of factors
 to the attention and they output the sequence of factors.
 And we're gonna start
 with the so-called single-head attention.
 So the single-head attention is like this.
 So you first have input as a sequence of factors,
 let's say H1, let's say Rn up to HTn.
 And you want to output H,
 I'm trying to define the type signature.
 So you output H1 out up to HT out.
 And what you do is the following.
 So the first thing is that you turn this input vectors
 into a set of query key and value vectors.
 So you define, so basically you say H,
 one in, you multiply it by a matrix Wq,
 this is a weight matrix, this is a parameter.
 And by the way, let's treat all of this as row vectors
 and then all the multiplications on the right-hand side
 as opposed to on the left-hand side.
 So every vector is a row vector
 and you multiply on the right-hand side,
 you get another row vector.
 So this H in, let's say this is like a dimension D, Rd,
 I say R1 by D and this Wq is in dimension,
 so this is in R1 by D and this Wq is in Rd by Dh.
 Dh is a parameter, it's a dimension you choose.
 And then the resulting thing is called Q1,
 which is in dimension Dh, maybe one by Dh,
 depending on how you think about it.
 And you can do this for every index, every time step.
 Here I'm only doing it for time step one,
 you can do it for time step T, so you have Qt.
 So basically this give you a sequence of vectors Q1
 up to Q capital T, each of them is in dimension one by Dh.
 And these are called queries.
 And you do the same thing for keys and values.
 So keys, let me define them first.
 So Kt is the same thing, you say the Ht in,
 multiplied by a so-called key projection matrix, Wk,
 and that's a Kt.
 And the dimensionality I think is the same,
 so this is also in the same dimension
 and the Kt is in the same dimension.
 And it's the same thing for value vectors,
 not value functions, Ht in times Wv.
 So in some sense, maybe this is the right time
 to talk about some of the intuitions for the attentions,
 which is not that obvious because eventually it just works.
 Nobody really know exactly how it works.
 But the rough intuition is that you have to have
 some interactions between these inputs
 to make it meaningful, because if everything is independent,
 then you're just dealing with all the time steps
 independently.
 So that's why you have to have some interactions.
 And interactions sometimes is about
 how do you kind of like retrieve
 or kind of pay attention to each other.
 So that's actually how the word attention comes from.
 So basically, when you are processing maybe this vector,
 you probably should pay attention to some other vectors
 which have relevant information.
 And which one you pay attention to
 is what we're going to decide here
 with this query and key and vectors.
 So in some sense, intuitively, the attention will,
 what attention will do, which I didn't show you yet,
 is that you try to, for processing each of the vectors,
 you try to figure out which are the relevant vectors
 that has relevant information,
 and then you pay actual attention to those vectors.
 And then you compute the output
 depending on those special vectors to some degree.
 So that's what we are trying to do.
 And to kind of like decide which one you pay attention to,
 you have to prepare these queries
 and key and value vectors, and how to use them.
 So use the query and keys as a way to decide
 which one you pay attention to.
 So basically, let's say,
 suppose you have the T-spersation, right?
 I want to decide what the T-spersation
 should pay attention to.
 And the way to do it is you say you compute the query QT,
 this is the query at T-spersation,
 and you multiply the query with the keys
 at all the other positions.
 So maybe I will just draw it.
 So you have queries Q1 up to QT,
 and one of them is Q little T,
 and you have K1 up to KT.
 And you multiply Qs with all the Ks.
 So you have Q1 times K1 transpose,
 QT times K2 transpose,
 and QT times K capital T transpose.
 And there is a, sometimes there's a scaling factor here
 to kind of like normalize this in a way
 that makes it a little bit more kind of like a well behaved,
 but I think for the moment,
 you probably don't have to pay too much attention
 to the scaling factor.
 So the important thing is that you are taking
 the inner product between Qs and each of the other Ks.
 And this QT transpose K transpose is actually
 the inner product because Q is a row vector,
 and K transpose is a column vector.
 And you are taking the inner product
 between these row vectors and the column vectors,
 and you get one scalar out of it.
 So this is, all of these numbers are real numbers, right?
 So this is in RT.
 So you have T real numbers.
 And then you take a softmax over these T real numbers
 to turn it into a probability vector.
 So then you say, I'm gonna do a softmax.
 Say softmax of this whole thing.
 And now you get what, you get a, this is a vector,
 the dimensionality here is RT,
 and each of these, the outcome of the softmax
 is a sequence of numbers, right?
 And they are T numbers, and all of these numbers
 are non-active, and the sum of them is what?
 So it's a probability vector over T positions.
 And if you see a large number, it means that,
 let's say, suppose this number is big,
 it means that this number is somewhat big
 compared to other ones.
 And it means that the Qs and Qs have more
 higher inner product, right?
 And it means that you should pay more attention to K1, right?
 So basically, if any of this entry is big,
 it means that intuitively, QT needs to pay more attention
 to K1, and that will be reflected by the probability vectors
 because the corresponding probability will also be high.
 And so I think let's call this,
 I guess I have a notation here,
 so let's call this, let's denote this to be PT1, PT2,
 up to PT, up to T.
 So each of the PTi is, each of the PTi is non-active,
 and the sum of the PTi over i from one to T is equal to one.
 So this is a probability vector.
 And if this, I know if this entry is big,
 it means that we should pay more attention
 to that particular position
 when processing the little T's query.
 And then how do you turn this,
 how does this relate to the final outcome?
 So finally, once you have this,
 then you say the output at T's position,
 which is a vector, is using these probability vectors
 to weight the values.
 The values is Vs, which we are defining here,
 Vt, sorry, Vt.
 So you say it's PT1 times V1 plus PT2 times V2 plus PTt
 times Vt.
 So basically, if each of any of this probability
 is much higher, then you are multiplying
 this high probability with the corresponding value
 at that position.
 So basically, you are using the V, right?
 If, for example, if this number is very big,
 then you are using V2 a lot in the output at time t.
 So you determine them by multiplying the matrices,
 and the matrices will be trained.
 How do you attempt each other is also trained.
 So you're only giving a template in some sense.
 Like how, it may be that it could be that all of these are zero,
 and then you are not doing anything with it,
 and then the loss function will be not good,
 but it's still a valid new at work,
 it's just the loss is not good.
 So eventually, you are gonna train the model
 to behave well so that, so basically,
 the training algorithms will choose the right W
 so that this mechanism is doing the right thing.
 (audience member speaking)
 So, let's try to articulate, I think it's a good question,
 but let's try to articulate so that we can answer it.
 So, what's the, you are, so--
 (audience member speaking)
 Yeah.
 (audience member speaking)
 So, I think you are asking why you need such architecture,
 but not just only using MLP, for example, right?
 That's one way to reference the question.
 I think, so if you are only using MLP in this way,
 suppose you remove all the tensions,
 you are only using MLP in this way,
 then there's no interactions
 between different positions whatsoever.
 So, if you are using MLP in this way,
 then you are only using MLP in this way,
 then you are only using MLP in this way,
 then there's no interactions
 between different positions whatsoever.
 So, there's no chance that it's gonna work, right?
 You are just applying separate networks
 for each of the tokens.
 There's no chance you cannot send the dependencies,
 the meanings, right?
 There's no chance I can just give you individual words
 and you cannot send a sentence, there's no chance, right?
 So, you do have to have a model
 that can read all the tokens and study their kind of
 correlations and combinations, so on and so forth, right?
 But there are other possible ways to deal with that.
 For example, what if you use a gigantic MLP
 that takes in all of this,
 maybe you concatenate all of them
 and you're taking one MLP, right?
 So, for example, you just concatenate
 all of these tokens' vectors into one long vector
 and you go through a new network.
 So, there are several issues with that.
 One is that you will have way too many parameters
 because your sequence length
 maybe sometimes even millions.
 Then if you have a million by million matrices
 in your MLP, it's gonna be way too big.
 Right now, the MLP is actually very small.
 It only takes in a vector for one position.
 It doesn't even depend on T.
 And another thing is that you're,
 not only the size of the MLP is big,
 but also the size of the MLP is also changes over
 as you change the sequence length,
 which is also very undesirable
 because, for example, if you tune with sequence length
 a thousand and then you test with sequence length
 a thousand and one, then you have to change
 your parameter count, which is not good.
 And here, if you really look into details,
 you'll find out that the number of parameters
 doesn't depend on the sequence length.
 - After a while, it would be like,
 you have to stand here to get back in.
 - Yep.
 - And it's too big to compute.
 - Yep.
 - But you kind of know that there is some structure
 because there are like words that match other words.
 So, this is kind of trying to learn the structure
 to get more efficient.
 - Exactly, right.
 So, you know that if you have sufficient compute,
 probably your gigantic MLP will work.
 If you have sufficient data so you don't overfit
 and you have sufficient compute,
 then there is some MLP that can actually solve this problem,
 but that's too expensive.
 So, you need to prescribe some structure
 so that you can reduce the complexity, right?
 And this is the prescription we have,
 but you still have to leave enough flexibilities.
 You cannot just say, for example,
 one way to do it is you just say, let's average.
 Then there's no parameters,
 you just prescribe too much, right?
 You dictate too much, then that's not good.
 So, it's kind of like a strike of violence
 between how much structure you introduce
 and how much flexibility you give the models to figure out.
 Yeah.
 Yeah, any other questions?
 By the way, there's actually, in the history,
 there was actually other ways to deal with this sequence.
 For example, you can use a convolutional network on this,
 which is kind of like MLP.
 So, you use MLP, but with a specific receptive field
 so that each time you only see kind of like a window.
 I think there are still papers that says
 that that's not a terrible idea.
 Actually, if you use a convolutional network,
 it actually can work to some degree.
 It's just not as good as this one, you know.
 And also, you can see there are also other,
 probably we'll talk about that later.
 So, there are other variants of tensions
 that does similar stuff, but have better efficiency.
 Anyway, so let's continue.
 We are not done yet, actually.
 This is only a single head attention, you know.
 Actually, the real thing is a little more complicated.
 But let's see, before I go into that, let's see.
 So, I think, you can see the notation scale is very messy.
 So, let's try to simplify it a little bit
 so that we don't have to always work
 with this messy notation.
 So, one typical way that people simplify this
 is that you try to organize all the queries into a matrix.
 Recall that each of the queries are row vector,
 and if you put them all in a matrix,
 then this is a matrix of dimension T by DH,
 and you can put all the keys into a matrix,
 and you can put all the values in your matrix as well.
 All right, so, and then you can write this H out.
 The output signal factors, you know,
 as a kind of like a, also as a matrix is,
 in some sense, you do a softmax of the row
 of this QK transpose divided by C matrix times V.
 So, here, the, basically, this QK matrix,
 QK transpose matrix is the family of QI times KJ transpose
 divided by C.
 So, every entry is of this form,
 which is kind of like these guys.
 And then, if you do a row softmax,
 that corresponds to this softmax.
 And then, if you multiply by V,
 it means this linear combination.
 I think we probably, we don't have enough time
 to go into the details, but you can double-check.
 It's just a very basic linear algebra.
 It's just real and ranging.
 Like, it's mostly just notations, right?
 So, this QK's divided by C matrix is the inner paradox
 between the queries and keys,
 and then you take a row by softmax
 to get the probabilities.
 So, after the softmax, this matrix becomes some,
 every row is a probability vector,
 and then you multiply that with the V
 to take the linear combination of V's.
 And there's one thing that we kind of cheat
 a little bit here, which is that,
 if you look at this architecture,
 then it's not true that the T's output
 only depends on everything before it.
 There's no, this kind of like an autoregressive
 kind of like properties yet, right?
 Because the output at time T depends on everything, right?
 It depends on V capital T, even the last input.
 V capital T is a function of the last input.
 And so, and the output at time T depends on the input,
 depends on VT and it depends on HT in.
 So, basically there's no kind of like this dependency.
 So, then what you do is you say,
 it introduces the concept of masking
 to make sure that there's no,
 this kind of like a wrong dependency you want.
 So, basically what you really want to do is that you just,
 in some sense, for H little t,
 you want to delete everything after time T.
 So, basically, I say, before you have this, you know,
 P T V T plus
 P T T V T, P T capital T V capital T.
 So, basically you say these dependencies are invalid for me,
 so I just don't have them.
 So, basically you just delete all of this.
 And then you renormalize this piece
 so that the sum of this piece got normalized to one.
 So, it's still a linear combination,
 a convex combination of the V even up to VT.
 So, that's pretty much what you do.
 So, you just say if the dependency is not good,
 you just, in some sense, mask them out.
 And mathematically what you do,
 or actually also implementation-wise,
 what you do is through this masking,
 which means that you,
 which means that you add a masking here.
 Maybe I see a different color too.
 That's what it is.
 So, you add a masking here.
 I think you're different by the color.
 Okay.
 So, you add a mask here so that you can mask out the,
 let me see, you can mask out half of this matrix.
 So, you have like a Q one K one transpose,
 Q one K two transpose, so on and so forth.
 And Q one K two transpose is not valid in some sense,
 because you are looking,
 you are attending to something you shouldn't attend,
 but Q one shouldn't be able to see K two.
 So, basically you add this masking matrix.
 What you add is that you add minus infinity.
 You add minus infinity here.
 And for Q one K three transpose,
 you also add minus infinity.
 So, and so forth.
 And then in the next row, you have Q two K one transpose,
 which is good.
 You have Q two K two transpose, which is good.
 And you have Q two K three transpose,
 which is not good.
 So, you add minus infinity here, so on and so forth.
 So, basically everything here
 will be adding additional minus infinity.
 So, basically this upper triangle part of this matrix
 will be all minus infinity.
 I mean, by adding minus infinity,
 you just mean that you turn it into minus infinity.
 Any number added by minus infinity
 is the minus infinity.
 And then what happens is that,
 or in other words, it's kind of like you are just trying
 to add all of minus infinity to all of this part.
 And then when you turn all of this into minus infinity,
 when you do the soft marks,
 this part just doesn't help, doesn't change,
 doesn't, like doesn't, by this part,
 I mean like everything after T, right?
 So, everything after little T,
 you turn them into minus infinity,
 and after you do the soft marks, they become zero.
 So, because exponential to the minus infinity
 becomes like, so, so, so, so, so,
 become basically zero.
 So, that's why, and it's P, so everything after P T T,
 everything after Q will become zero.
 And the sum of the rest will be one.
 So, that's exactly what you, how you achieve this,
 because basically the combination
 of the rest of the terms doesn't matter,
 because their coefficients are zero.
 Yeah, we are masking this because you shouldn't,
 in this autoregressive model,
 you don't allow the output, I time T,
 to depend on anything that is after T.
 So, you have to respect this kind of like
 a sequential dependency.
 So, you know, in generation, you are not able to see
 the future tokens to generate a current token.
 So, every token only depends on everything before it.
 So, that's why we have to mask it out.
 Okay, we have, yeah, we are almost done there.
 Okay, so, okay, so this is the so-called
 single-head attention.
 And we have to make it even more complicated
 to even finish the attention part.
 So, then what we do next is that,
 maybe I see this here.
 So, in some sense, what we are doing here
 is that we have H1 in and HT in,
 and we go through this single-head attention.
 I guess, in the note, I call it attention1H,
 and you get this H1 out up to HT out.
 That's what we defined so far.
 And in practice, you have multiple copies
 of this single-head attention
 with different weight matrices.
 So, you get another copy of the single-head attention.
 Maybe let's call this single-head attention1.
 This is called single-head attention2.
 And they have the same input,
 and then you get another copy of the output.
 And here, by copy, I don't really mean literally copy,
 because then it's not useful.
 So, what's the difference between this and this
 is that the weight matrices are different.
 So, basically, this WQ, WKWV,
 for these two copies of the attention are different.
 So, that's why they're not really literally copies.
 They are just, like, you have another version of it.
 So, in some sense, you should index this by something else,
 because the output will be different.
 So, maybe you should index this by,
 let's say, this is, because this is the first attention,
 you say H11 and HT1, and this is H12, HT2.
 And you also have another one,
 and you get H13 up to HT3.
 So, when you have so many copies,
 you have several sequences of vectors,
 but eventually, you only want one sequence of vectors.
 So, you have to combine them in some way.
 And the way to combine them is that you,
 you concatenate these three things.
 So, you concatenate H11 out, H12 out.
 I think how many, each of these is called one hat.
 So, you have, let's say, NH, NH hat.
 So, this is a tension in sub H.
 So, you concatenate all of these vectors,
 and you get, and then you multiply that
 with another projection matrix,
 and then this will give you the final H, the output, at one.
 So, that's the final output at position one.
 And you do the same thing for position two,
 where you concatenate maybe these guys,
 these guys, and then you do a projection,
 you get the output at position two.
 So, in some sense, this will just give you more power
 to compute different kind of like,
 kind of attention.
 In some sense, you know, I think, actually, in practice,
 if you, I think the intuition is that
 maybe each of these attention is doing,
 single-hat attention is trying to pay special type of like,
 is doing some special type of job, right?
 For example, maybe here, it's trying to find out
 which entity in the past passage matters to me.
 And here, this is trying to find out which,
 what are kind of like the sentiment of the past passages,
 and which part of the sentiment matters to me,
 so on and so forth, right?
 So, each of these attention,
 probably pay attention to different type of information,
 and then eventually, you aggregate the outcome
 of all of this information into one big vector,
 and you project it into a single output.
 Cool.
 - The second attention is the output of the first one?
 - No, no, they are all parallel, yes.
 - But how parallel?
 - They are parallel, and then you aggregate.
 So, and all of this is in one of this.
 And then, so basically, in one of this,
 you have multiple parallel heads,
 and then next round, you have another number of parallel heads.
 (audience member speaks off microphone)
 I think the number of heads is maybe on the order of like,
 maybe, at most, 100, I guess?
 Let me think about this.
 I think, something on that order, I think, yeah.
 (audience member speaks off microphone)
 It also depends on the model size, of course, right?
 I think the biggest one, I don't know,
 I don't know whether a hundred is for which model size,
 I think maybe for like a hundred-billion
 pattern in the model, so you have a hundred heads, yes.
 (audience member speaks off microphone)
 - Yeah, I think, I don't know exactly what's your proposal,
 but maybe it sounds like a simplified answer,
 but like many of these proposals
 has been considered in various ways,
 and some of them are for,
 on most of them are for efficiency perspectives,
 because eventually you can just have a,
 like as we discussed, like if you really don't have
 efficiency, you can just have a generic,
 very gigantic new artworks, right?
 So, all of these kind of like special structures
 to try to use your parameters in the right way,
 so that you can use it more efficiently in some sense.
 Okay, so, and then, okay, so I guess let's try to,
 let's just give me two or three minutes
 to talk about some very quick things.
 So, one thing is that actually when I draw this,
 it's actually a little more complicated than just doing this.
 So, because there's also a residual part
 in this kind of like how to combine the MLP with attention.
 So, actually what you really do is that you say,
 you apply, so after you do the attention,
 you do some kind of like normalization here.
 So, there's a normalization layer.
 Often this is using the RSM norm that we briefly discussed
 in one of the new artworks section.
 And then you apply MLP and then you add the residuals
 back to this, you kind of like in the residual artwork
 that we discussed.
 And then you go to the next layer.
 And there are different ways to kind of like add residuals.
 You can add residuals after you do the attention
 or before you do the attention.
 So, there's something called pre-norm and post-norm thing.
 So, I guess the details you can check out lecture notes.
 So, there's some kind of like orders on how you,
 when you apply a normalization, residuals
 and attention, so on and so forth.
 And finally, I think one important thing,
 especially for the next lecture about a system ML perspective
 is that we should try to quickly think about
 the computational efficiency here and the memory footprint.
 So, how many operations we have to do,
 especially as a function of t?
 As a function of other things, it's actually actually easier
 because as a function of the number of parameters,
 you know, like all of those is kind of like,
 it's all multiple kind of linear in some sense.
 The main important thing is what is the dependency on t?
 And you can see that for each of the t's position,
 you have to compute all of these inner products.
 So, for each of the position,
 you have to compute capital T in a product.
 So, and you have capital T of these positions.
 So that means that you have to basically do
 a t-square dependency, right?
 So, or in other words, even this matrix itself,
 it's a T by T matrix, capital T by capital T matrix.
 And each of these actually requires some inner product.
 So, I think the dimension, if you still remember,
 the qi's or the qt's are in RDH,
 and you need to compute t-square of these inner products.
 So, basically, the number of operations is t-square times DH.
 A dependency on DH is less relevant,
 the, you know, less important to some degree.
 The dependency on t-square is very important,
 because this means that if you have capital T being a million,
 it's gonna take a million times square operations,
 which is prohibitive.
 So, and this is one of the issues with
 the long context issues, probably, I've heard of,
 like I think when you are using chat TVT or cloud code,
 you see the context, and then after some point,
 they say, let me compact my context, right?
 And the reason is that you have to shrink the context,
 otherwise your computational efficiency is too bad.
 But of course, you know, in the real production system,
 it's not like all of this capital T is really,
 like there are other ways to reduce the dependencies.
 I think in practice, I don't think necessarily
 t-square is probably more closer to linear in T,
 because there are other ways,
 variants of transformers that can reduce the dependency on T.
 I think after, in the next Wednesday,
 we are gonna discuss a few things
 that can reduce the dependency on T a little bit.
 Exactly how you do it, we don't really know in some sense,
 because there are a lot of open source papers
 that propose different approach.
 I don't know exactly which one is used
 in open-ended topic.
 And another thing is that what is the memory usage here?
 So the memory usage, you know,
 at the first side, you have to spend t-square memory,
 because this matrix itself requires t-square memory.
 But that actually can be reduced
 because you don't have to actually compute
 the whole matrix one by one,
 and then do the multiplication with V.
 So in some sense, to some degree,
 you can do some part of this matrix
 and multiply with part of the V first,
 and then you don't have to save that part of the matrix.
 You can compute the second part.
 So, and the idea is called flash retention,
 probably you have heard of, which is a way
 to reduce the memory footprint in these systems.
 So, yeah, I think that's, but you know some of these
 kind of ideas do have a trade-off,
 because when you reduce the, for example,
 if you change your architecture
 to make the dependency on t-square better,
 for example, we'll discuss some of this on Wednesday.
 So if you change the architecture,
 the dependency on t is better,
 but your architecture is less expressive,
 and then you may lose some performance to some degree.
 Okay, sounds good.
 So I guess, you know, I think you have,
 you know, Chris has talked about a linear model,
 which is kind of like you have a model,
 which is parametrized by theta, and the input is X.
 Let's just recall a notation
 so that we are on the same page of our notation.
 I think Chris is using almost exactly the same notation.
 You know, it cannot be exactly the same,
 because sometimes it's not only a model, right?
 So, but for linear model, recall that, you know,
 if you have a linear model,
 then the model is kind of like this, right?
 You have theta H, theta X, which is equals to theta one,
 X one, plus theta two, X two, up to theta D, X D,
 where X is the input, which is a d-dimensional vector,
 and theta is the parameters,
 which are also a d-dimensional vector.
 And once you have non-linear models, what does that mean?
 You know, generally non-linear just means
 that as long as this form is non-linear, then it's non-linear.
 And here we are mostly talking
 about non-linear inner parameters,
 because this non-linear in the data
 is not non-linear enough in some sense, right?
 Suppose you have something like theta one, X one, square,
 plus theta two, X two, square, so on and so forth,
 the dX D square, I think we didn't talk about
 this kind of models, you know, because we skipped them,
 in some sense, in the new version,
 but this is not sufficiently non-linear to be interesting,
 because you can just define new data,
 which is the square of the old data.
 So suppose you say I'm gonna replace this by Z one,
 and replace this by Z two,
 and then it still becomes a linear model.
 And that way you are not trying to find out what are the,
 you are trying to learn the theta, say the I's, right?
 You're gonna figure out the parameters of theta I.
 You don't really have to figure out,
 there's no learning on Z I's, right?
 So whether Z is Z I or X I square,
 it doesn't really matter, right?
 So that's why this is not exactly what we're talking about,
 even though some people will say
 this is still a non-linear model,
 but this is not exactly what we are talking about.
 We are talking about cases like you have theta one square,
 for example, X one plus theta two, maybe.
 You know, I'm just giving you an example,
 something like this, right?
 Whatever non-linear model you can write,
 as long as non-linear is called non-linear model.
 Okay, so, of course, you know, the real model
 we are talking about is not that like this,
 this is just one example.
 So the model we are gonna talk about is new artworks,
 which is more structured and more in a specialized way.
 Anyway, so, but before talking about new artworks,
 let's talk about how do you learn non-linear models
 and what's the kind of the framework.
 This is in some sense mostly just recalling
 what Chris was talking about,
 with a little bit twist about, you know, in the model.
 So basically the model can be a general function,
 as opposed to a linear function.
 So let's just quickly recall some of this.
 So let's say you have a data set.
 I think Chris probably mentions the concept of data set,
 which is a family of data points
 with pairs of inputs and outputs.
 So here, let's talk about super concerning, by the way.
 You know, in other cases, you know,
 we have data sets of different formats.
 But here, if you have a super concerning data set,
 you have a sequence of input and output pairs.
 And let's say we have n of this.
 And let's say we assume xi is indeed.
 And just recall that in this lecture, in this whole course,
 we are trying to use this notation where the superscript
 is for the indices of the examples
 and the subscript is for the dimensions, the coordinates.
 Right, so when I write x sub i,
 this is the first coordinate of the vector xi.
 And we have superscript is indexing one particular example.
 Go ahead.
 (audience member speaking off mic)
 Yeah, yeah, that's a great.
 So if you are only non-linear in x,
 but not non-linear in theta,
 then it means that you can replace the x
 by something else, right?
 You can replace xi.
 For example, in this example,
 you can replace x1 squared by z1.
 And then you just say z is my input now.
 And then I have a linear model in both z and theta.
 So fundamental is the same as linear model
 from a learning perspective.
 But here you cannot do this, right?
 There's no way you can easily transform it
 into a linear model.
 Actually, there's no way, just fundamentally.
 So that's why it's becomes,
 it requires different kind of like,
 slightly different kind of techniques, right?
 So some of the linear models' techniques
 cannot work anymore.
 - That's just one example of a potential non-linear model.
 - Yeah, yeah, you can write, you know, yeah, yeah.
 This is just the one, you know,
 you can even add more things, you know,
 you can take more square roots, you know, whatever.
 You can take squares, you know, yeah.
 You see some real examples.
 Yeah.
 - You talk, it's really weird if you just add in, like,
 another theta and the x1,
 but it's not, like, an x1 squared with that.
 So you think that's a problem?
 - In which cases? In this case?
 - Yeah, like if you just have, like,
 no big square terms.
 - Okay.
 - Sorry.
 - So you would add on, like, theta, like, d plus one, x1,
 instead of x1 squared.
 - I didn't get what you mean,
 so you add on something here?
 - Yeah, just x1 instead of x1 squared.
 - So you add one of these two?
 - Yeah.
 - But then you change the model, right?
 Suppose my model is really one, you know,
 suppose my model of assumption is just literally this.
 My argument was that you can replace x1 squared by z1
 so that you maintain the model's functionality,
 but you can reapply the same techniques
 that is useful for linear models.
 Okay, sounds good.
 So, anyway, so, okay, so how do we,
 so now let's just assume you have a general,
 okay, so let's talk about the framework.
 So, and you have, let's say we have a regression problem.
 I guess, you know, Chris lecture talked about regression,
 versus classification, and for regression problem,
 let's say, one of the distinction
 between regression and classification
 is that we have a regression problem, the yi,
 the labels are in real numbers, right?
 These are real numbers, and then your model,
 let's say, is the h parameterized by theta,
 which is a function that maps the input,
 which is the rd to a real number r, right?
 And you can have a cost function, or maybe loss function.
 I think these states, people use the word loss function
 more often.
 In the lecture notes, we still use cost function,
 but most researchers understand what you are talking about.
 So, this is saying most likely,
 of course, there are also many different type of,
 means, error functions or loss functions you can define.
 By the way, error and loss and cost is the same.
 Let's just use loss for all the cases.
 And the loss function could be something like this.
 With j, for the i-th example,
 the loss function is a function of the parameter,
 because the data is not something you optimize for, right?
 It's not a variable, it's given.
 So, loss function for the j-th example is,
 yi minus h theta xi, you apply the data,
 you apply the model to the data, you get some prediction,
 and you compare that with the real label,
 and you take the square, right?
 Something like this.
 And then, you can also have the average loss,
 which is something like one over n
 times the sum of all the losses.
 So, and then you try to minimize this function
 over the parameter theta.
 So, that's for regression.
 And let me give another example.
 I think you are, this is mostly just repeating
 some of the stuff we have discussed.
 The only thing here is just that this is a non-linear model,
 as opposed to a linear model, right?
 So, like a increased lecture,
 I think this is just the theta one x one,
 plus x two, so on and so forth.
 And I guess for multi-class classification,
 we can also talk about single-class classification,
 which is actually in the lecture notes.
 I think I just have to give you an interest of time,
 let's just only talk about multi-class classification.
 Basically, you just have to define the loss function,
 the same way as we have done for linear models,
 except that you replace the models by non-linear functions.
 By the way, I think in most cases,
 you don't have to think about the superscript i,
 because this is just indexing examples, right?
 So, if you remove, if you say,
 "I only have one example x and y,"
 then everything without a superscript still works.
 Maybe I should just write in that notation
 to simplify it a little bit.
 So, let's say you have, so in this case, the y,
 I can write y superscript i for the i label,
 or I can just use y to indicate one label.
 Let's say, suppose you have one label,
 in multi-class classification, you have,
 it's a discrete choice of labels, right, one to k.
 And here, I guess, you know,
 you can say you have a model, let's use h-bar,
 which is like an input x,
 so the x is still in R-D, think of this as an image,
 think of this as some kind of labels for the image,
 and then the, which is matching the input from two k numbers,
 and these k numbers are often called logits.
 This is the same logits in the linear case.
 So, and then you say the,
 which is logits the predictive probability of each class,
 of each class, for this example x,
 for each class as a class j,
 is this kind of like exponential form, right?
 You look at the j's, this is the j's output, right?
 Index j means that this is the j's output
 of this k-dimensional vector,
 and then divided by the sum of the exponential
 of all the, this is the so-called softmax.
 So this is the so-called softmax.
 Sorry.
 So this is the so-called softmax function of this h.
 And then, so basically, you say, yeah.
 So basically, your model is like this, right?
 So this is your model, so P of y is equal to j,
 given x is this.
 This is my parametrics model
 for the prediction parametrics by theta,
 and then I need to compute the log likelihood,
 so I'm gonna use negative log likelihood,
 which is also what we have discussed before.
 By the way, here, this is also a log likelihood model
 if you assume there's some Gaussian probability distribution.
 I didn't really define, go through that calculation.
 So if you think of that your model,
 your probability model is something
 you add a Gaussian to the h theta,
 and then you compute the log likelihood under that Gaussian,
 then it's the same mean square error.
 Here, I'm just going through more details.
 So I define my probability distribution,
 I compute log likelihood on the data,
 so this is a minus log P of y, given x,
 and my parametrics model,
 then this is a minus log of this thing.
 So, oh, sorry, I think one sort of thing here
 is that this is the, so this model specifies
 what's the probability for every choice of j,
 but now I have a particular choice of j,
 which is equals to my label y,
 so that's why I'm plugging my y,
 so this is exponential h theta bar x.
 This is for the particular label I'm given,
 the yth index, the yth corner of that
 logit vector divided by the denominator is the same,
 just the sum of the exponentials.
 Oh, I think I have some typo here.
 I mean, this is just called the entropy loss,
 I think if you look at the multi-class classification case,
 this is the so-called cross entropy loss.
 You can have many different form of it,
 but this is the cross entropy loss,
 where you can just write this h theta bar.
 So this is the logit, this is the label,
 and you can plug in the cross entropy loss.
 If you use PyTorch to implement it,
 I think you can find the modulo,
 which is just called cross entropy loss,
 and you give it to the inputs, you can compute the loss,
 but of course the underlying math is this.
 Okay, this all sounds somewhat familiar to some degree.
 Okay, good, any questions?
 - Can you explain why it's called cross entropy loss?
 Is there a reason for that?
 - It's cross entropy, oh, is there,
 so what's the second part of the question?
 - Where can we say that you would see questions?
 - Yeah, I think this is the cross entropy
 between the probability distribution defined by h theta x.
 Okay, so I think, here's the thing,
 so if you, so the question is,
 why is this called cross entropy loss?
 I think if you, how do I write it in some sense?
 Like, I think if you have, let's say this distribution,
 let's call it maybe p theta, okay?
 So, and I think this cross entropy loss
 is actually equals to the cross entropy
 between the true, I guess you have to take,
 if you take the expectation of this L cross entropy loss,
 of this h bar and y,
 and expecting so a y from the true distribution,
 from the true label distribution, whatever you call it,
 and then this is equals to a cross entropy
 between this distribution p theta
 and a true distribution p star,
 which is something like you,
 I guess the cross entropy is just a,
 it's actually the probability of one distribution
 times the log of the probability of another distribution.
 Yeah, I think the derivation is probably a long,
 especially if you're reading this language
 and you have a cumbersome, but this is a fundamental,
 I think actually probably I have it in the lecture notes,
 I forgot exactly, yeah.
 Any other questions?
 Why, what is the one-hot question?
 You know, see in my case, you know, in my notation,
 y is just a discrete variable.
 So that's why you can see I have h theta bar theta x
 indexed by y, y is like two or three or four, okay?
 So, but you can also encode y as a one-hot vector,
 which is the same thing, right?
 So like, then your math needs to be a little bit different,
 right, then this is gonna be the inner product
 between this vector times the one-hot vector.
 Yeah, but here I'm just using y
 as really a discrete choice between one to k.
 (audience member mumbling)
 So, can I repeat a question?
 Sorry.
 (audience member mumbling)
 (audience member mumbling)
 Okay, so the question is why for the regression case,
 it also is not like likelihood, right?
 So I think the, let me try to see
 why I can do it on the fly, I think it should be easy.
 So I think the modeling, so if you make
 the model assumption that if you assume,
 suppose you assume that your model assumption
 is that y is generated from, say, h theta bar,
 theta x plus some Gaussian noise,
 but epsilon is from n zero, maybe sigma squared,
 something like this, then the likelihood of y given x is,
 you know, I think one over, I guess this is challenging
 my memory of this, something like this,
 exponential y minus h theta x square over two,
 sigma squared, I guess, some like this,
 and then you take the negative log likelihood,
 so then this is a log of p y given x is equals to,
 there's some constant, you take the log,
 you get a constant, which doesn't really matter,
 and you got the log of this, which is one over two
 sigma squared y minus h theta x square.
 So then it's kind of like this, right?
 The scaling doesn't really matter
 because this, it doesn't change
 the optimization function fundamentally.
 Sounds good.
 Any other questions?
 Okay, cool, so.
 And in this case, here I only have one example, right?
 You're venturing the average over many examples, right?
 So I guess maybe just, let me write here,
 so if you continue here.
 So eventually your loss, your real loss
 is something like the final loss
 is the average over all the examples.
 You take the cross entropy loss
 of each of these examples xi and yi.
 So, and each of these functions is a function of theta,
 so basically your total loss is also a function of theta.
 And now, the next task is to optimize,
 to find theta that makes the loss smaller, right?
 The same, I think we also introduced a little bit about
 within descent, you know, like a Newton method, right?
 So these are all ways to optimize things.
 So here you can now use Newton method
 because the function is now convex,
 so that's why Newton's method is not guaranteed to work.
 Actually, no methods can guarantee to work
 for all non-convex functions,
 but stock casting within sense seems to be a good idea.
 So just to quickly recall, you know,
 you can use an optimizer.
 So optimization, I think one of the options
 is you take winning descent.
 So let's say, suppose you have a loss function,
 let's just summarize all the cases as this.
 Let's just be a little abstract.
 So let's say each of the examples have the loss ji of theta,
 and you have an average of these loss functions.
 Winning descent means that you just say,
 I'm gonna ignore the structure here.
 I just treat this as a single loss function.
 I take the update, theta is updated to,
 I think we use this notation to denote update,
 something like eta times gradient of j of theta.
 So this is winning descent.
 And how do you compute this gradient?
 You compute the gradient of each of the loss,
 the gradient, sorry, you compute the gradient
 of each of the loss with vector parameters,
 and you add it on up.
 But that's winning descent.
 And for stochastic winning descent,
 so what you do is you say, your first sample,
 let's say b, let's see, so your sample,
 I guess they are, you know, maybe let's say,
 the most vanilla version of it is you sample one item,
 you sample j from one to n uniformly.
 And then you run this, you know,
 so of course there's a for loop.
 And you sample, and then you say theta is updated
 to theta minus eta, blah, blah.
 The cost of the example j, the cost of loss of example j,
 theta.
 And the kind of the justification here
 is that if you think about what this is,
 so the difference here is that here you compute the gradient
 of the average loss, and here you only compute the gradient
 of one single example, the loss on one single example.
 And the justification here is that you say,
 even though this is one example,
 it's not actually the loss of the whole gradient,
 but actually if you look at the expectation of the,
 the gradient, the per example gradient,
 and your randomness come from j, right,
 which is sampled uniformly from one to n,
 this is equals to the gradient of the average gradient,
 the gradient of the loss function.
 So in some sense this quantity is approximation
 of this quantity, and the approximation is in the sense
 that this quantity in average is equal to this.
 It's just that sometimes it's biased towards,
 it's never approximately, let's say suppose
 this quantity is in this direction,
 and this quantity is just, it can be any directions,
 but if you average out all the possibilities,
 you get the origin direction on the goal.
 So in some sense you have a much larger noise, right?
 So if you do gradient descent, it's kind of like,
 I guess maybe I use two different colors.
 So suppose you use gradient descent,
 this is the gradient of the average loss,
 and if you start casting gradient descent,
 it starts casting, you may go here, you may go here,
 or you may go here, maybe you may,
 sometimes you may even go in the reverse direction,
 but in average all of these blue ones will average out
 in the same direction as the black one.
 And so, and then if you have a trajectory, right,
 so suppose the black one goes like this,
 the blue one, because it's not casting, you have noise,
 right, so our goal look like this, right?
 Maybe something like this.
 Maybe like even, but in average it's kind of roughly
 tracking the gradient descent.
 Of course, how much this tracks,
 how much these two things tracks over time
 is a very complex kind of like a matter,
 like it depends on how large the step size is,
 how, you know, kind of like,
 it depends on many kind of like subtle things,
 but conceptually you should expect that the blue one,
 some would track the black one.
 The blue one in average is exactly equal to the black one
 in one step, but the arrow sometimes can be amplified,
 sometimes the arrow can be shrinked,
 so it depends on the situation.
 Ideally, you want them to track to some degree.
 - Generally, you want to use stochastic gradient descent
 or a non-context descent.
 - I think you can use gradient descent as well.
 So, but I think I got here the question, you know,
 this is a quick, I think it sounds like the question
 is really about why you use stochastic gradient descent.
 In what cases you want to use that stochastic gradient?
 That is a great question.
 So, why you even consider stochastic gradient descent?
 The reason is that computing this gradient
 is very costly each time,
 because you have so many examples.
 N could be, you know, in 2015,
 it's kind of one million examples.
 In 2026 now, I think it's kind of like, you know,
 like one trillion tokens, right?
 There's no chance you can compute all the gradients.
 Even computing one gradient is very costly,
 let alone computing all the gradients.
 So that's why you have to find a efficient way.
 So that's why you want to have a simpler
 which is less costly.
 And maybe just one, so, and also another reason
 you can do this is that computing the full gradient
 sometimes is actually wasteful,
 because maybe it's the case that all of these
 individual gradients are actually, they are correlated.
 They are highly correlated, right?
 So there's no reason to compute each of them
 to get, understand which directions go, right?
 So you just only need a subset.
 It's kind of like every example tells you
 to go that way, why you have to compute all of them, right?
 You just need a subset of them.
 And another thing is that even this is not entirely true.
 In many cases, like, you don't really have to be
 very precise in this dynamics.
 It's kind of like, even you have some mistakes,
 you know, it will be corrected later.
 So in some, maybe another way to think about is that
 for some cases, like, for example,
 if you have a convex function, right?
 So in some sense, like, one way to do it
 is that you do this, right?
 But sometimes if you kind of like overshoot,
 you know, or maybe you go in a wrong direction,
 still eventually you're gonna go down.
 How do I say this?
 Like, you know, basically, even you have some perturbations,
 this is not exactly the right example,
 but like, even you have some perturbations in your dynamics,
 then over time, because you are,
 every time you have to share a target,
 eventually those kind of perturbations
 got kind of like washed out by the shared force in some sense.
 - So I just wanted to ask on a non-convex function,
 I guess, like, have a low convex function.
 And I believe that this is very true,
 still have to be consistent.
 Are we still able to use gradient descent
 or would we not be able to?
 - Yeah, and that's a great question.
 So one of the theory for why stochastic instant is good
 is that it can work better on non-convex functions.
 And maybe that makes, let me first explain what you said,
 but actually it's not entirely right.
 So I think, so basically,
 suppose you have a non-convex function in 1D, right,
 let's say, right, so like this.
 So if you start here, you keep going down,
 this gradient descent just means
 you go downhill in some sense.
 So you go to the directions which is the,
 going downhill in the,
 sometimes it's called steepest descent.
 It's basically you're finding the direction
 which is going downhill the fastest in some sense, right?
 So you just go here and you get stuck here
 because you can never leave this place, right?
 Here the gradient zero, right, the curvature is zero.
 And I think what you are trying to say is
 that you could do stochastic gradient descent
 because there's some noise.
 Maybe, even though you want to go this way,
 maybe the first step, you just, because of the noise,
 you go the other way and you jump to the other minimal.
 I think this is plausible, but generally speaking,
 you know, of course the theory here is kind of very limited,
 but I think the community don't believe
 that this is the case.
 This is why stochastic gradient descent is helping.
 I don't think people believe that stochastic gradient descent
 can help you to jump out of a local minimum.
 However, on the other hand,
 we don't even believe that there are many bad local minimum.
 So, in 1D it's actually very easy to have local minimum,
 but in high dimensional cases,
 it's not that trivial to have that many local minimum.
 So I think at least one, actually I was involved
 in developing some of this theory.
 Of course, nobody really knows exactly
 whether they are right, but the common hypothesis
 or hypothesized consensus in some sense
 is that there are very limited number of bad local minimums
 in this high dimensional function you're optimizing.
 Maybe there's even no bad local minimum.
 All the local minimum are actually global minimum.
 It's kind of like you think about,
 you are skiing in a mountain.
 Like, I think if you just randomly try to go down scales,
 skiing downhills in 2D, right?
 You're probably gonna go back to one of the parking lot,
 which is one of the global minimums, right?
 So like, but in 2D, I think it's a bit easier
 to have a local minimum.
 You probably go back entry and you got stuck somewhere.
 That's possible, but you always find some river going,
 always find some valley going down eventually, I think.
 Not, I'm just gonna give an analogy.
 It's not exactly true in 2D, but in high dimensional,
 it's more likely to always find a way
 to go downhills in some sense.
 - It's possible.
 So can you give some illusionistic mathematics
 that actually shows why,
 which I would find to be counterintuitive,
 you don't see that many local minimum
 in high dimensional spaces.
 I just find it hard to summarize it.
 - Yeah, I think, I don't think
 there is a very simple way to say it.
 I think it's not universally true, right?
 So like, so in some sense it's just,
 I think maybe the, you know,
 if I can only use one or two sentences,
 I think it's kind of like, just in high dimension,
 it's always, there's always some ways to,
 like local minimum is your Hessian at that point.
 It's just all, in all directions, positive, semi-definite.
 That's a very hard thing to satisfy.
 So like, so you find a local,
 you find a stationary point where the gradient is zero
 and you look at Hessian, the Hessian is kind of like,
 always have some direction which is negative.
 So, and I think, I will think about how to formalize this,
 you know, like, so for example,
 if you think about it,
 the gradient zero is already a pretty strong constraint,
 but you suppose you already have like,
 suppose you have a D dimensional function
 and you add D constraints
 that each of the dimension of the gradient is zero.
 That's already restrict yourself a lot.
 And if you add another thing,
 which is the Hessian is positive, semi-definite,
 I think that just makes the number of points much smaller.
 Yeah, and in some cases you can compute it.
 In one of my papers,
 I think we try to compute the number of local minimums
 by using this, I think the, in differential geometry,
 there's something called Cass-Rez formula.
 And actually not only my papers,
 but many other people's papers.
 So in some cases you can compute or you can count
 and you found out that, oh,
 all the local minimum are actually just those,
 number of local minimum is the same
 as number of global minimum.
 But generally it's very hard to count.
 Any other questions?
 Okay, sounds great.
 So, okay, so going back to here,
 so that's the algorithm people do.
 Of course, practically speaking,
 you don't also just only sample one example each time,
 because sampling one example,
 you know, sampling using all the examples is too inefficient
 because you have to compute all the gradients.
 Doing one example, the downside is that it's too noisy,
 right, so sometimes you want to have like a trade-off,
 right, so you want to have a few examples
 and so that you can, you can be a little bit less noisy.
 And another thing is that,
 which probably we won't go in detail here,
 but another thing is that
 we have one example, your GPUization is too low.
 You know, it's not always the case,
 but in some cases, using too few of examples
 make your GPUization too low.
 For example, if you have like 10,000 GPUs
 and you just only compute one example,
 one gradient each time,
 then most of the GPUs are actually idle.
 So that's why you need a so-called batch gradient descent.
 Oh, sorry, like I think it's called,
 it's also still called stochastic gradient descent
 with some kind of like small batches.
 I think SGD just means like,
 both the version with batch size one
 or one of the bigger batch.
 So we have a bigger batch is,
 you know, you can imagine what it is.
 Basically, you just say, I'm gonna,
 with batches,
 I guess you should call it SGD.
 So I think you just changed the algorithm to be,
 you sample, say B examples
 from one to N,
 and then they used say theta is equal to theta
 minus eta gradient.
 Okay, sounds good.
 So, and okay, so this is just a general,
 introduction to the framework for the supervised learning.
 And actually, in some of the answer questions,
 it's the same thing.
 You define a loss function for each example,
 so you average them.
 The only question is,
 when you have answered learning later,
 that we'll cover, you don't have the whys.
 So, but still the kind of the framework is the same.
 You define the loss functions,
 but the loss functions involve why,
 and then you have average loss functions,
 then you run the optimizers,
 you can choose different type of optimizers.
 So, and then, pretty much there are two questions.
 So, we're gonna adjust.
 So, the two remaining questions.
 Question one is that, what is this function H theta, right?
 So we haven't, right, so this whole framework
 works for every function H theta,
 and, oh, H theta bar, I think I use bar
 just because it's a little bit different, no.
 Without bar, it's just a,
 I just want to distinguish it from the regression case,
 but they mean the same thing.
 And so, and the question, so question one is,
 how do we define H theta?
 And question two is, how do we compute,
 how to compute the gradient,
 the gradient J on each of the example?
 And once you know how to compute the gradient
 for each of the example, you can compute the gradient
 for all the examples, or batch the examples,
 by averaging the gradient for every examples.
 So, and that's called, so this is called back propagation.
 The algorithm for this is called back propagation,
 or auto-differentiation,
 which is the topic of next lecture.
 And in the rest of this lecture,
 I'm gonna define a bunch of H theta that people are using.
 Mostly for, like, more classical cases,
 like vision cases, like super-cerning,
 and, of course, for language case,
 you're gonna have even more complicated
 nonlinear functions like transformers.
 Okay, so, okay, so that's the plans.
 I'm gonna start with, you know, the very basics,
 like the right works, so.
 So, we're still using these kind of housing examples.
 I know that this example is probably too old,
 like, it's 20 years old.
 So, let's say, suppose you have, like,
 to motivate the introduction of, like, nonlinear models.
 Suppose you have, like, size,
 and, like, this is the price, right?
 That's housing price prediction.
 So, you know, if you look at the real data,
 most likely something like this.
 Maybe some, I don't know exactly what it will look like,
 but at the beginning, it doesn't increase that much
 as the size goes up, and then eventually it becomes linear.
 Let's say this is the case we will see in the data, right?
 So, you know, if you use a linear model,
 and you're gonna fit something here,
 then you're gonna not be accurate enough.
 So, that's why you probably have to have a nonlinear model,
 which is something like this.
 So, you want your model to be able
 to alter a curve like this.
 Of course, you don't really know which line is this.
 It could be like a, you know,
 a priority without a single data,
 you can have multiple kind of, like, curves like this,
 but at least you should allow the model
 to generate a curve like this,
 as opposed to only generating a linear function.
 So, and what this function is, right?
 So, this function is actually of this form.
 So, this blue function is actually of the form,
 it's a max of, say, WX plus B,
 which is a linear function, and zero.
 I guess, you know, especially if you,
 suppose this is zero, then you just,
 maybe I say this is max WXP and this zero plus C.
 So, max of WX plus B is kind of like a function like this.
 And then if you, sorry, this one is like this.
 And then if you, plus C, you can shift it
 above or below a little bit.
 So, basically, you just cut off everything
 that is below zero, which makes sense
 because, you know, for housing price,
 it cannot be negative, you know, it has to be positive.
 So, yeah, okay.
 So, and so this, actually, this introduce a primitive
 that is used very often in deep learning these days,
 which is this function, which is max of T and zero.
 So, I think in mathematics, people call it this,
 like people write this, something like this,
 but for us, we just call this value.
 I think this is the standard in machine learning.
 So, this function is called rectified linear units,
 which is literally just this function
 where you have linear functions on the positive plane
 and then zero on the other side.
 So, zero and then linear.
 And linear with slope one.
 So, this is a very important primitive.
 And then you can write this function as, you know,
 this function can be written as relu of T,
 maybe plus C, something like this.
 Oh, sorry, relu of, like I said,
 this one will be written as relu of WX plus B plus C.
 So, basically, you introduce, so, you know,
 you see, if you don't have the relu,
 then it's basically linear function.
 But if you have the relu,
 then you just somehow change the shape a little bit.
 And also, this relu is often called activation function.
 I think the reason for the word activation is because in,
 there's some kind of like connections to biological networks.
 I think in biology, you know, like in your brain,
 in our brain, the neurons kind of like
 how the neurons are fired up
 is a nonlinear function of the stimulus
 it receives from other neurons.
 So, and the, it's not exactly this,
 but it's something like this, right?
 So, like when it's passing some threshold,
 you got the neurons got fired up
 and below that threshold,
 the neurons just doesn't do anything.
 So, that's why it's called activation, right?
 If it's fired up.
 So, but I think in biology, you know,
 I'm not an expert there,
 but, you know, based on my knowledge
 of the threshold, the function is never exactly like this,
 sometimes it's like a sigmoid.
 And that's why sigmoid was used
 at the very beginning of deep learning.
 And, but then later on, people realized that this is actually,
 this relu is actually a bad idea
 for neural networks for various computational reasons,
 which we'll probably discuss in a bit.
 Anyway, so for now, I think that's kind of like,
 just remember this concept.
 So, actually, we have already defined
 a one dimensional neural network.
 So, basically, this is a neural network
 with one dimensional input and a few parameters.
 So, that's already a neural network.
 So, then the rest of the,
 for like 10, 15 minutes,
 we are just gonna generalize this to multiple higher dimensions,
 you know, like, and you apply this multiple times,
 and that will make it a more complex neural networks.
 And then we're gonna even build more on top of that.
 So, okay, so next, what do we do?
 So, this is only one dimensional input, right?
 And so now let's try to do a higher dimensional case.
 Let's say, suppose you have a data with dimension D,
 and then how do you kind of like imitate this
 and make it non-linear?
 So, the way to do it is that you say,
 I have X in D, and then I have a parameter W,
 which is also in dimension D.
 And often, this is called the weight vector,
 and actually, eventually, it will be a weight matrices.
 So, that's why weight and matrix, you know,
 are associated together.
 You know, weight vector is a rare case.
 And then you also introduce another number B,
 this is called bias.
 And then you define your model like this.
 (tapping)
 Say, value of W transpose X plus B.
 This is the inner parameter between two vectors,
 and you get the scalar out of it.
 And then you add another bias, which is still a scalar,
 so the output of this is a scalar.
 And so then, basically, we have like
 higher dimensional inputs and one dimensional outputs.
 This is actually called a one-layer network.
 So, basically, apply this value once.
 So, and now, let's try to kind of like stack multiple.
 So, this is one neuron, actually,
 because you apply one activation in some sense,
 it's one neuron.
 And then you can have multiple neurons.
 So, I mean, one of the typical examples I used to give,
 you know, maybe this is not the exact best example these days.
 For example, let's say,
 suppose you think about the housing price, right?
 So, it probably depends on a lot of intermediate features.
 Suppose housing price depends on, for example,
 maybe, okay, maybe I'll give you the full example,
 just to slow down a little bit.
 Let's say, suppose you have this cases
 where X1 is the size, X2 is the number of bedroom,
 and X3 is, let's say, the zip code,
 and maybe X4 is, let's see what's,
 maybe the,
 I don't know what L4, X4 is in my notes, means.
 But anyways, this is your raw inputs, right?
 So, maybe you can think of like,
 there are some intermediate things
 that actually matters more than this raw inputs.
 Let's say you have intermediate
 quantities that you, quantities.
 Like, for example, you say,
 workability, right?
 How easy to walk around a house, right?
 Maybe there's another one which is the school quality.
 So, these are, in some sense, variables
 that are not present in your original data,
 but they matters a lot to the price of the house, right?
 And each of this, maybe let's call this A1, this is A2.
 Each of this is actually a function of X1 up to X4,
 which can be computed as some nonlinear function.
 So, you can imagine that A1 is probably some kind of,
 like, a nonlinear function of, you know,
 maybe value of some of these linear combinations
 of this thing.
 And you can imagine maybe A2 is also
 some nonlinear function of this, of,
 maybe I say, I'm using notations in a pretty sloppy way,
 just to give you an example, you know,
 finally we're gonna define things more formally.
 And then you can say, oh, maybe my final Y
 should be a linear combination of these two guys.
 Maybe I have another parameter, make theta nine,
 A1 plus theta 10, A2, something like this.
 So, then this way, you kind of, like,
 stack two layers on top, you have two neurons,
 and you stack another linear functions on top of it.
 So, in some sense, you are applying this recursively.
 So, that's kind of like the fundamental idea
 on how do you kind of compose.
 So, basically, you apply these nonlinear functions,
 you know, you apply a linear function,
 you apply some nonlinear functions,
 and then you get some articles,
 and then you apply another linear version,
 and you can probably apply another nonlinear function here,
 and then you keep composed.
 So, that's the rough idea.
 But let's try to make it a little more formal,
 so that it's probably more obvious.
 Let's see, what's the right way for me to erase this stuff?
 I think we can probably start from the left.
 So, one of the ways that people used to draw this kind of things,
 you know, at least 10 years ago,
 was that they draw on this kind of, like, inputs like this.
 So, suppose you have x1 up to xd,
 and then you say I have some intermediate variables a1 up to ad,
 maybe am, and then each of the intermediate variables
 depends on all of this, and they have some dependencies here.
 So, let's say am depends on all of the input variables,
 and you just draw these kind of edges,
 and then you can say I have another layer of intermediate variables,
 and they connect to each other.
 So, these drawings are, you know,
 once you know what they are talking about,
 the drawings are very useful,
 but when you don't really know what they are talking about,
 it's kind of, like, confusing.
 So, what I really mean here is that, you know,
 the way you do it is that you say first,
 let's say, let's do only one layer, maybe just to formulate.
 So, we have x1 up to xd, right?
 So, then let's have a1, the first intermediate variable
 is defined as maybe relu of w, say, 1x1 plus b1,
 where w1 is a vector, even though I have an index 1,
 but it's the first vector, w1 transpose.
 And x, so x is here, x is a d-dimensional vector,
 w1 is a vector, so the inner part together,
 you get a scalar, and you either scalar b1 here.
 That's how you get a1, which is kind of like what I got there,
 like a1.
 So, I use w just because I think people use w and b
 to distinguish the weight matrices and the biases.
 And then, you have a2, which is a relu of w2 transpose x plus b2,
 where w2 is a rd and b2 is an r.
 And then you have a bunch of this.
 Let's say you have, like, up to an.
 Let me see whether an is my notation here.
 It's very easy to mess up the notation in this kind of cases.
 This an is relu of wm transpose x plus bn.
 And that's how you define a1 up to an.
 And each of the ai depends on all of the xi's
 in this particular way.
 And then you can say, I'm going to apply another.
 My output will just be a linear combination
 of all of these ai's.
 Let's say the output is some linear combination of the a's
 plus another bias.
 So here is the thing.
 How do I write a linear combination of the ai's?
 I can write something like theta 1, a1, so on and so forth.
 But if I always kind of expand this, it's too complicated.
 So what I'm going to do is I'm going to write a vector.
 Let's say w transpose a plus another b.
 But you realize that when I write this,
 this w needs to be distinguished from other w's.
 And that's why I think I'm going to use this 2 to say that this
 is the w on the second layer.
 In some sense, these are the w's on the first.
 So there is another.
 So all of these ai's are combined to h theta x.
 And that's why people write this is the w on the second layer.
 And these are the w's on the first layer.
 So I'm going to write another bracket, w1, something
 like this to distinguish the first layer and the second layer.
 So and this w2, super square bracket 2,
 is a vector of the same dimension as a,
 not of the same dimension as x anymore.
 Because you have to compile.
 You have to inner product with a.
 So this is in dimension Rm because of m entries here.
 And b is always a scalar.
 So that's how you define a 2-layer network.
 So you have a lot of image.
 And you can see this notation is kind of messy.
 So you probably shouldn't-- when you have
 too many superscript up subscripts,
 at some point, it's kind of too messy.
 So that's why for most of the cases,
 some cases you have to live with this kind of notations.
 But in most cases, you can simplify even further.
 You say, actually, if I write everything
 as matrices and vectors, I don't have
 to really think about each of these details.
 So basically, I just write a as a vector in--
 this is a vector in Rm.
 You can write this value of a matrix w times x plus b.
 And here, w and b are a little bit different.
 So w, I guess I need to write w1 and b1.
 So this is a matrix, w1.
 If you want to look-- understand the correspondence
 between this notation and this notation,
 so w1 is this matrix of dimension m by d.
 And each row is w1 transpose up to w1 transpose.
 So you put all of this row vectors, because once you--
 by the way, all the vectors are supposed
 to be column vectors if you don't do any transpose.
 If you really don't understand this,
 you should try to understand them.
 At least, depending on the situation,
 in many cases, it's good to keep in mind
 whether these vectors is a row vector and column vector.
 So all of these are column vectors.
 And then you can transpose this into row vectors.
 So this is a row vector.
 And you put all of them, stack them into a matrix.
 And then this b1 is just the vector of all the scalars.
 But in many cases, you actually don't
 have to necessarily remember this correspondence.
 You just remember this.
 It's fine.
 You have a vector.
 You multiply a matrix.
 You get a vector.
 And then you add a vector bias.
 And you take value entry-wise.
 That's probably important.
 So value applied to a vector, t, is the same
 as you applied entry-wise.
 So in many cases, you just say, oh, one matrix application,
 one layer is just a multiple matrix, add a bias vector,
 and apply value.
 And you get a vector out of it.
 So you don't have to necessarily understand all the details.
 Sometimes you do.
 But in most cases, these days, you don't have.
 And if you count how many parameters are there,
 this is m by d. This is the dimension.
 So m by d, because the input dimension is d.
 The output dimension is m.
 And in a matrix, that turns the d dimensional input
 to m dimensional outputs.
 That's why you need m times d parameters.
 And then this guy has m parameters.
 So the total parameters, parameter count, is m d plus m.
 So d is the input dimension, m is the output dimension.
 And this is the output dimension.
 This d equal to 1, as in the first layer there.
 This is b y, yes.
 And this b y is this b y.
 So any questions?
 And I think eventually, actually, many of these details
 don't really matter if you don't care.
 So for example, you can even just write this.
 Like, for example, you can just say, oh, I even
 simplified notation here.
 You can say, I think you can say,
 let's just say this is a matrix multiplication.
 So let's say you have a matrix multiplication with w and b.
 So w is the weight matrices, which is this w.
 And b is the bias.
 And you apply z.
 And this is just equals to wz plus b.
 And then you can say, I'm going to apply a sigma.
 Sorry, let's say sigma is-- I guess maybe I didn't probably
 go over too fast.
 I see.
 So maybe just before I talk about that,
 I think I already alluded to it.
 So this value here can be also replaced
 to other non-linear activations.
 So you can replace the value with some other non-linear
 activations.
 And all the other activations are functions that maps r to r.
 So it's always a scalar function.
 But you can apply this to vectors
 by entry-wise applying it, apparently entry-wise.
 And other activations could be like sigmoid.
 Sigmoid look like this.
 Let me just save some time to now define the equations.
 You can re-electron those to see the exact equations.
 There are also 10h, which looks like going through 0.
 So all of these activations are generally increasing functions,
 but not always the case.
 And I think there is also leaky value.
 There's a bunch of different activations functions.
 For example, leaky value looks like--
 now this is actually used that much.
 If you want to see what's used in the latest network,
 I think you have to check the lecture notes.
 I just added a few, which I don't have it on my notes.
 But there's also functions like this.
 Anyway, generally, it's kind of like some almost
 increasing functions.
 And often, on the left-hand side of the 0,
 it's kind of close to 0.
 But not exactly right.
 So for example, the one I just showed, this is called jell-u.
 Let me now to write--
 I think the definition of it is-- the jell-u's definition
 is this, just in case you care about the exact equation.
 So it's not exactly non-linear.
 It just dips a little bit.
 I think it doesn't go above 0.
 It's like this, strictly speaking.
 So it dips a little bit, and then it goes up.
 So exactly why I use any of this is kind of like a magic.
 I think people seem to find out that using some kind of somewhat
 smooth functions is actually useful.
 So rell-u is actually not necessarily great
 because it's not smooth enough.
 But other than that, I don't really know exactly.
 Sometimes it's just the ability to think.
 Sometimes it's just the trial and error.
 Yeah.
 So OK, so that's the activations.
 So now I'm trying to have more and more abstract versions
 that you don't have to deal with all these notations.
 So then once you have the activations,
 you can define this, right?
 This is just the sigma of w, z plus v.
 This is the abstract version of that.
 And then you can compose many times.
 You can say, I'm going to apply another one.
 So my model can be like, say, apply a magic notation
 on top of this sigma, and then, right, so w, v, z.
 And then apply another thing, apply another thing, so on and
 so forth.
 And each of this is one layer.
 And if you apply a magic modification, sigma is another layer.
 And if you do another one, it's another layer.
 The number of layers is defined pretty much
 as the number of magic modifications.
 Yeah.
 But here, one thing I'm going to describe to you about this
 is that I didn't really tell you what's the parameters here
 in this magic modification.
 So technically, if you want to write this formula,
 you have to say, oh, this is w and v, and this is what?
 Is it still using w and v, or some other v?
 So oftentimes, you use a different w and different v.
 The shape is similar, but the variables
 are different variables.
 So then you have to introduce the bracket again.
 So let's say this is the bracket 1, v1.
 And then here, the parameters of w bracket 2, v2, so on and so
 forth.
 And then you index each of them to fully specify the network.
 Is that matrix just a n plus 1 [INAUDIBLE]
 Which matrix, sorry?
 [INAUDIBLE]
 So this matrix?
 Yeah.
 Yeah, so what these matrix are, so the only requirement
 is that you need to make sure that dimensionality is
 compatible.
 So your input-- wait, did I write z?
 Oh, yeah.
 So let's say suppose your input z is, say, dimension d.
 Then you can only apply a matrix with--
 so to make wz make sense, you have
 to make sure w is of dimension something by d.
 And then something is what you can choose, almost free.
 Of course, not all the options are the same eventually
 in terms of the results, but for the compatibility issue
 perspective, you can choose them arbitrarily.
 And let's say suppose the first layer you choose,
 let's say you choose matrix multiplication, say, w1, b1, z
 plus z.
 And suppose this w1 is m1 by d.
 So that means that you map this d dimensional vector
 to m1 dimensional vector.
 So this output is going to be m1 dimensional vector.
 And if you apply a sigma, it's still m1 dimensional vector.
 And next time you apply the matrix multiplication,
 you have to make sure that the input dimension of that matrix
 to be compatible with m1.
 So basically, if you do another one, say, w2, b2,
 then it's required that w2 needs to be something
 times m1 dimension.
 And something, the output dimension,
 is still what you can choose freely.
 But the input dimension is not.
 And you have to do this again and again.
 So once you have multiple dimensions,
 so basically, maybe the easy way to think about it
 is that you have a matrix times, say, z plus b.
 So this dimension is what I call the input dimension.
 Because this dimension got multiplied with the dimension
 of z.
 And this dimension is the output dimension.
 But the output dimension becomes the input dimension
 for the next round.
 So that's why you need to make sure all the dimensionalities
 to be compatible.
 Does that make sense?
 And in many cases, I think the original input dimension
 is something you cannot change.
 So that's fixed.
 That's based on our data.
 And then afterwards, you don't change dimensions that often.
 You typically use the same dimensions for quite a while.
 Maybe you change it once or twice, something like that.
 And just in case you read some of the old papers,
 and I think even these days, still the architecture papers
 sometimes draw like this.
 They just draw-- people go more and more abstract.
 They say, I have an input x.
 And they apply a matrix multiplication.
 And then I apply another, maybe a sigma.
 And I apply another matrix multiplication.
 So and so forth.
 That's how people actually draw these networks
 without expecting all details.
 And you can even merge these two together to call it MLP.
 So sometimes you would just draw this.
 You'd have x.
 And if MLP is called multi-layer perception,
 often it encapsulates one or two layers
 of a few of these components.
 When people say MLP, I think sometimes it's
 one matrix multiplication, one sigma.
 Sometimes it's two matrix multiplication, so on and so
 forth.
 [INAUDIBLE]
 I think in most cases, you get smaller dimensions.
 The intermediate dimensions become smaller.
 And that's often because the input dimension
 is often very big.
 For example, for language, the initial--
 the vocab is kind of like--
 the token, I guess I'm jumping ahead a little bit.
 But your initial dimension could be like 250k or something
 like that.
 And then you shrink it to probably 2k.
 And then keep using 2k.
 Yeah, something like that.
 And for vision, I think the same thing.
 Because initially, you have an RGB encoded kind of image.
 You have three channels, three RGB three numbers.
 And each is like 256 by 256.
 Or maybe depending on the resolution.
 And you have to shrink it a little bit.
 Yeah, OK, what else?
 I think one thing is called ResNet.
 I think that's still useful.
 So probably I should tell you about it.
 So let me erase something here.
 But eventually, you can define many components like this.
 Most of these components are matrix multiplication
 activations.
 And I will tell you a few other components that are still
 largely being used in different cases.
 And some of the very more than components like our tension
 using language.
 I'm going to talk about those in large language model lectures.
 So these are some--
 so one of the components called residual at work.
 I'll just say residual connections
 if you think about the components.
 So the residual connection is like this.
 So instead of using-- keep using this kind of things.
 The residual connection is kind of like--
 that's called residual Z--
 is this interesting thing where you have two applications
 of this alternating between matrix multiplication
 and activations.
 And then you add your input, again, back to it.
 So one thing that is actually-- at least by definition,
 it means that you don't change the dimension here.
 Because to make this compatible, your input dimension
 or dimension are exactly the same.
 And of course, these two matrix applications
 are not using the same weight matrices.
 I'm not just going to write exactly what they are.
 But they are not using the same matrices.
 And this is called a residual block.
 And this was introduced in 2015 in this very famous residual
 network paper.
 I think the rationale was that if, let's say, suppose--
 by the way, this Z doesn't have to be our original raw input.
 This could be one intermediate layer.
 And then you apply this Z. You apply this residual block.
 And then you can actually apply many, many residual blocks.
 So eventually, this is our residual block.
 And eventually, the residual network, the residual net
 looks like with some approximation.
 It's kind of like you apply a lot of residual net
 many, many times.
 And at the beginning, you need to do something maybe
 to change the dimension, because you cannot work
 with the original dimension.
 So you first change the dimension
 to some dimension of the intermediate dimensions.
 And then you apply many, many residual network.
 And maybe you have to apply one more at the end
 to change the dimension again.
 But largely speaking, it's application
 of many, many residual blocks.
 And that's called residual network.
 And the original motivation was that why you apply this,
 that's because suppose you believe that at some point,
 you are already getting close to your labels.
 So suppose at some point, Z is either approximately equal to Y,
 let's say.
 Y is your target.
 And Z is your intermediate variables
 in some intermediate layers.
 Then you probably shouldn't model the differences
 explicitly, because you're already kind of close.
 You just probably shouldn't use the matrix to model
 the only differences.
 So basically, you should probably just model Z minus Y
 as some residual--
 or maybe Y minus Z, sorry.
 Say Y minus Z as some residual of Z.
 And if you believe in that, like a--
 sorry, not the residual of Z. Y minus Z
 should be some kind of like network, say something like this.
 Plus, like this.
 So if this is your belief, then if you move Z to the other side,
 then you have Y is equals to sigma and Z plus Z.
 And you can see that this is kind of like almost the same
 as here.
 The only difference is that they found out,
 actually, you probably shouldn't use a one layer
 to model the difference.
 You should use two layers to model the difference.
 So they say, oh, let's say you do two of this.
 And then the same thing you just have like this.
 So this is just a story.
 It's not like there's any formal proof there.
 And actually, people have tried to--
 10 years ago, people have tried--
 maybe seven years ago, people have tried
 to see how many blocks here you should do.
 You can do two layers, three layers, L layers.
 And eventually, I think two or three layers are the best.
 Also, for reasons we don't fundamentally
 understand necessarily.
 So that's residual network.
 I thought, yeah.
 [INAUDIBLE]
 So suppose this is the modeling assumption.
 You model only the differences.
 So this implies that they are the same.
 Which one is the hypothesis depends on what you believe in.
 But somehow, if you somehow believe
 that it's more beneficial to model directly the residual,
 then you do this.
 And then you rearrange.
 You get this.
 That's the only thing I'm saying.
 Nothing profound.
 [INAUDIBLE]
 And there are other explanations for why this works.
 For example, some of the theorists,
 they try to analyze the optimization perspective
 of different modeling.
 So basically, if you don't add Z here versus you add Z,
 in some cases, you can argue that adding Z
 will make the optimization easier,
 make your optimization more well-conditioned,
 including some of my papers.
 I think there are some degree of truth there as well.
 It's just that it's very hard to fundamentally--
 you have many explanations for it.
 It's very hard to know exactly which one is the right
 explanation.
 Maybe-- let's see.
 I have seven minutes.
 Any questions?
 [INAUDIBLE]
 There is no-- I got a question.
 What's the intuition?
 Maybe I see it.
 So the intuition could be that, oh, maybe this is already small.
 Then maybe I should direct and model that, as opposed
 to model the original label.
 So it's a simpler task.
 The original label-- predicting the original label is very hard.
 But if you predict the difference, probably it's easier.
 So that's why you model an easier task with two-layer
 networks, and that's pretty much it.
 There's nothing more formal than that.
 Let's see.
 I have seven minutes.
 I think-- let's see.
 Should I attempt to talk about two things?
 So maybe let me quickly talk about layer norm.
 And I can see whether I have time to talk
 about the convolutional network.
 So layer norm is also something that people still
 use in large-language models.
 So of course, it's in a slightly different form these days.
 So the original layer norm is the following.
 So basically, it's still-- it's a component, right?
 So it's a block.
 So you have some input that's called a z.
 And this component is trying to normalize z in some way.
 And the way to normalize it is that you say you first
 turn z into some normalized version of z, which is z minus
 mu 1 over sigma 1, common z minus mu m sigma m.
 I say z is m dimensional, sorry, z1.
 I should follow the notes more closely.
 I think this is of the same-- yeah.
 Maybe I should even use-- so let's say--
 I don't remember why I use hat, but let's use hat.
 So this is how we normalize.
 Where mu hat is the empirical mean,
 which is the average of all the z's.
 And sigma hat is the empirical--
 sigma hat squared is the empirical average
 of the standard deviation.
 So this will empirically normalize it to norm 1,
 so you can see it's pretty--
 and then it's not done yet.
 And then you turn this into--
 sometimes people found out, oh, actually mean 0 and norm 1
 is not that great for whatever reason.
 So they say, oh, let's be flexible.
 Let's also add flexible tunable parameters, beta and gamma.
 So let's turn-- the next step is turn this
 into beta plus gamma z1 minus mu hat, sigma hat,
 where beta is a tunable-- beta is a variable that you can train,
 and gamma is a variable you can train.
 And so basically, this make a mean beta and standard deviation
 gamma.
 So that's the original layer norm.
 And then later people realized, actually, you probably
 don't have to do this.
 You just-- so this is the layer norm.
 And now I think there's something
 called RMSAM norm, which is even simpler.
 You don't subtract the mean anymore.
 You just divide by sigma.
 So you just say you do z is turned into z1 minus sigma hat,
 say z m minus sigma hat.
 And the sigma hat is also different.
 Sigma hat is only the average.
 It's only kind of like the-- you're only averaging over,
 like the-- you don't subtract here.
 So you just try to make the-- so sigma hat is something
 like 1 over m zi-- sorry, zi squared.
 And then you still do the beta thing, right?
 And then you turn this into beta plus z1 over sigma hat.
 Why this is kind of like more better or not?
 I think it's mostly empirical.
 So basically, here you don't really want to make a term--
 let me think about this.
 Wait, sorry.
 I think you still need gamma-- sorry.
 Did I keep gamma or keep beta?
 I keep the gamma.
 Sorry.
 Never mind.
 You do this.
 So gamma is a general parameter.
 So basically, this is saying that I
 don't have to care about the shifting mean.
 I don't really make a mean zero, but I still
 care about normalizing it in some way.
 But I still leave some degree of flexibility gamma, which
 is not really normalizing.
 I still allow it to be normalized to something
 that I will decide later in my training.
 So this is kind of like the magic here.
 It's not like you try to force it to normalize to one standard
 division.
 Why?
 You actually say, I first normalized to one,
 and then I leave a gamma parameter there so that in the
 training I can normalize to anything.
 And I think-- let me see.
 Yeah, I don't have money.
 So one benefit of all of this is that you
 make it kind of like a scaling environment
 for both the parameters and the data.
 So what does that mean is that if you multiply--
 so maybe let's say you call this whole thing called,
 let's say, Z. Let's just say--
 so suppose this whole operation is called a layer norm.
 So you apply Z, and you get a layer norm of Z.
 And you can find out that there's a scaling environment,
 which means that if you apply a scalar--
 let's say you multiply a scalar, say, alpha to Z,
 and you get L and alpha Z. But L and alpha Z is actually
 equals to L and Z.
 So basically, no matter how you multiply the input,
 you don't really change it.
 And so that's why no matter how you multiply your matrices
 or how you multiply your input data,
 you never change the output, unless you
 change some of the parameters like beta and gamma, which
 is, in your test time, you're not supposed to change them.
 So basically, this makes the model more scaling environment.
 And in some cases, it helps stabilize the model.
 For example, intuitively, with some degree of approximation,
 there are-- at least in the past,
 when people tuned all of these models,
 it happens that sometimes you apply the layers many times,
 and then the output becomes bigger and bigger.
 And it becomes really big.
 It's like 10 to the 20 or something like that.
 And then everything just blows up.
 So when you normalize every time,
 then you never got into this issue.
 And also, it makes initialization a little more
 easier so that you don't have to-- before,
 if you don't do something right, then suddenly, everything
 just blows up.
 And now the scaling doesn't really matter that much.
 But there's also subtlety here, because when you have--
 OK, this might be a two advanced comments.
 One study fact of this is that when the forward pass
 is scaling environment, but actually, the gradient
 is not scaling environment still.
 So some of these issues got pushed into the optimization,
 which is a much more complex matter.
 Anyway, so I guess-- let's see.
 So I think the only thing I didn't cover
 is the convolutional network.
 I think it's in the lecture notes.
 So if I spend one minute on it, I
 think it just means that instead of multiplying a few matrix,
 you actually multiply a topless matrix.
 I'm not sure you've heard of this word.
 So basically, it's a matrix with some structures where--
 so instead of having-- this matrix, convolutional network
 just basically means you have a matrix that's
 kind of look like this.
 The non-zeros are only like this.
 And it's actually the same as non-zeros.
 You shift this vector here, and you put it here,
 and you put it here, and you put it here.
 It's actually called a filter in some sense.
 So this matrix, all the other parts of the matrix is 0.
 And only this-- what I drew here is kind of non-zeros.
 And also, they share the parameters.
 So basically, this vector is the same as this vector.
 So you apply kind of like a shifting environment
 kind of like filter to each--
 to the data.
 And it's called convolutional.
 Of course, the real thing is a little bit more complicated.
 So when you have 2D and so and so forth, it becomes complicated.
 And in the lecture notes, we have that.
 But convolutional network is not used that much,
 except for very hard correlation cases.
 And even for variation cases, people use language models
 like transformers allowed.
 So that's why I probably start to skip them.
 OK, sounds good.
